OCR results for chartularyofcist00cist_bw.pdf

CHARTULARY

OF THE

CISTERCIAN ABBEY OF COLDSTREAM



CHARTULARY

oF THE

CISTERCIAN PRIORY

OF

COLDSTREAM

WITH RELATIVE DOCUMENTS,

EDITED BY THE

REV. CHARLES ROGERS, LL.D.

FELLOW OF THE ROYAL TUSTORICAL SOCIETY, FELLOW OF THE si
FELLOW OF THE ROYAL SOCIKTY OF NORTH
ROYAL SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,

OF RUSSIA, MEMBER OF
HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF

‘THE HISTORICAL AND GENEALOGICAL SOCIETY OF

RIES OF SCOTLAND

LONDON
PRINTED FOR THE GRAMPIAN CLUB
1879



EDINBURGH
'RD BY M'FARLANE AND ERSKINE,

ST JAMES SQUARE.




CONTENTS.

——_

PAGE
PREFACE, . : : : : : : : . Vil
CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM, . . . . . 1
APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS, . 46
ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS, . . . . . . . 59
ABSTRACT OF APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS, : - 75

SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE:
L ESTIMATE OF THE DAMAGE DONE BY THE ENGLISH ARMY
AT THE NUNNERY OF COLDSTREAM, MARCH 28,1296, 77

Il. PETITION OF THE PRIORESS AND NUNS OF COLDSTREAM

TOEDWARDL, .  .  .  .  . «80

Ill, MANDATES BY EDWARD I, ON BEHALF OF THE NUNS OF
COLDSTREAM, =. . we eC

IV, CHARTER TO ISABEL HOPPRINGILL, PRIORESS OF COLD-
STREAM, OF THE LANDS OF HIRSE! . 81
V. ELECTION OF PRIORESS OF COLDSTREAM, —. . . 83

INDEX, . : : : : : : : : . 88



Page 1, line 7 from foot, for

9
20
23,
23
30
33
34
36

38,
39
44

» 13,
wT 17,
» 204,
» 2 oy
we 2 oy
» 4 oy
» 8»
» Wy,
» 4
2 oy
» 6 4,
» lay
» 19,

tr,

ERRATA.

que,
“quamlicuit,”—,,
“Whielhope,”

read ‘ jus.”

“<qualicunque.”

“ Wveshope.”
“Sengedewde,”

“ Grayden.”
“Ista,”

“habet.”
“Camminesmedu.”

“* Garini.

“ Noveritis.””

a» insert after Bernham, “Roberto Stater Galfrido de

ss 59 Sengedowa,” —,,

» a» “Gray senescallo,” ,,

foot, ,, “Item,” ”

top, y, “Cammesmedu,” ,,

foot, 4, © Ganini,” ”

top, 4 “ Noverit,” »
Bernham.”

»» for “Seoto,”

foot, 5, “uotam,”

top, 4, ‘“evidentes,” »

v» after “signum,”

read ‘* Stater.””

“vevam.”
‘ ostendentes.””

insert  meum.”



PREFACE

Tne order of Cistercian monks, founded by Robert,
Abbot of Molesme, in the diocese of Langres,
France, in 1098, was so designated after one of its
earliest monasteries, Cistercium (Citeaux) in Bur-
gundy. The monks wore white vestments, with
black cowl and scapular. In Scotland they owned
thirteen monasteries, and there were also eleven con-
vents connected with the order. The Cistercian con-
vent or priory of Coldstream stood at the point where
the stream of Lect joins the Tweed in the ancient
parish of Lennel, Berwickshire. It was founded and
dedicated to the Virgin by Gospatric, Earl of Dunbar,
third of the name, who also reared the Cistercian
nunnery at Eccles in the same county. His seal,
from an impression appended to a charter granted
by him to the friars of St Cuthbert’s Church,

1 “ Henricus, Presbyter de Lienhale,” is one of the clergy present on the
17th July 1127, at a mecting of the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of
Durham, and others, respecting the privileges of Coldingham (Cotton MS.,
Domitian, vii., fol. 47 and 44, cited in “ [lhustrations of Scottish History,”
by the Rev, J. Stevenson, 1834, p, 122).




vill PREFACE,

Durham, is presented in the accompanying en-
graving."

In the foundation charter (8), Earl Gospatric grants
to the sisters of Witchou,? along with certain portions
of land, half the church of Laynall or Lennel. Of
the church of Lennel, a structure certainly not
later than the close of the thirteenth century,
the remains, consisting of one broken arch in decora-
tive architecture, are still visible. In this same
charter the earl gives to the convent a portion of
land at Birgham on the Tweed. At this place,
about three and a half miles to the west of Cold-
stream, where a bridge united the two kingdoms,
several important transactions have occurred. Here

* The original charter is preserved by the dean and chapter of Dizham,
and is printed in Raine’s “ North Durham,” appendix exii, A facsimile
will be fonnd in Anderson's  Diplomata,” Ixxi,

® Chalmers, in his “Caledonia” (ii, 342), remarks: “The nuns were
brought from a Cistercian convent at Withow, in England.” For this asser-
tion he produces no authority, and there is no trace of any religious house

of the name, ‘The uame was probably the original description of the spot
on which the conyent stood.




PRE

1x
in 1180 King William the Lion, meeting in conference
the Bishop of Durham and other English courtiers,
refused their demand on the part of Henry II. as to
levying a tax for a new crusade. At Birgham, on
the 17th March 1289-90, was held a meeting of the
guardians, nobility, and commons of the kingdom,
to approve the papal dispensation for the marriage
of Prince Edward of England with the young Queen
Margaret. At Birgham, in 1291, the several com-
petitors for the Scottish throne met the commis-
sioners of Edward I. In his foundation charter, Earl
Gospatric associated himself with Derder, his coun-
tess, who personally bestowed on the nuns a carucate
—that is, from sixty to a hundred acres—of the
Hirsel, together with the church of that place.
Situated about a mile to the north-west of Cold-
stream, the Hirsel now constitutes the beautiful
demesne of the Earl of Home. The church or chapel
of the Hirsel had disappeared prior to 1627, though
the churchyard then remained in use."

In the foundation charter, Earl Gospatric names
as donors his cousin Addoc, and Norman, son of
Edulf. Among the witnesses is Walter (Waldeve 2),
the earl’s son; also Gilbert Fresell (Fraser), grand-
father of Bernard Fraser, Sheriff of Stirling in the
reign of King Alexander II. In a charter of
confirmation (11) by Earl Gospatric, the land of
Hirsel is named in the older form of Herishille.

1 Account of Certain Parishes, 1627, published by the Maitland Club,



x PREE.

UE.

These charters received episcopal confirmation
from Richard, Bishop of St Andrews (Appendix
I), a circumstance which would determine the
date of erection, since Richard was consecrated in
1165, and the founder, Earl Gospatric, died in the
following year.

Earl Gospatric, founder of the convent, left two
sons, Waldeve and Patrick. The latter inherited the
manor of Greenlaw, leaving a son, William, who,
espousing his cousin Ada, obtained with her as dower
the lands of Home. Waldeve, the elder son, suc-
cecded his father as fourth earl. By charter he con-
firmed his father’s grants, and further bestowed on
the convent the lands of Whitchester (26). One
of the witnesses to this charter is Roger de Merley,
doubtless the great baron of Morpeth whose ancestor,
Ranulf, married Juliana, daughter of the second
Earl Gospatric, and with his wife, according to
Dugdale, founded the abbey of Newminster, near
Morpeth, circa 1138.

Earl Waldeve died in 1182, leaving by his wife
Aclina, with other children, a son, Patrick, who suc-
ceeded to the earldom. He confirmed to the nuns
(7) the church of Laynall with its pertinents ; also
(17) the church of Hirsel, granted by Earls Gos-
patric and Waldeve, Patrick his uncle, and William
his uncle's son. In his time various grants in con-
nection with the lands of Scaithemor, situated to the
north of Coldstream, were made to the sisters by the



PREFACE, xi

family of Norman of Leinhal. First, Richard, son of
Norman of Leinhal, gave to the convent the lands of
Scaithemor (5), which his father granted to Amabel,
Richard’s mother; then Amabel (6), wife of Norman,
surrendered her dower to the convent, and thereafter
(3, 4) Earl Patrick granted charters of confirmation.
Among the witnesses to the charter of Amabel is
Robert de Wallibus, or Vaux, ancestor of the Lords
of Dirleton.

A zealous supporter of the Church, Earl Patrick
bestowed gifts on the abbeys of Kelso, Melrose,
and Dryburgh, while his wife Ada, illegitimate
daughter of William the Lion, founded several con-
vents. He died in 1282, leaving two sons, Patrick
and William, also a daughter Ada."

Patrick, second of the name, succeeded Patrick,
his father, and is designated both of Dunbar and
March. During his father’s lifetime he granted to
the convent the lands of Selbuclethe, also the pasture
lands at Ferniley and Strikesley (29, 30).

Contemporaneous with the grants of the second
Earl Patrick were those of his sister Ada. Obtain-
ing from her father the lands of Home, she espoused,
first, William de Courtenay, who died without issue.
Thereafter she married her relative, William, son of
Patrick of Greenlaw, who, after his lands, assumed
the name of Home. To the nuns William was a

2 According to the “ Chartulary of Melrose” (48), he would appear to have
hada second wife named Cristina,



xil PREFACE.

liberal benefactor. He confirmed to them the church
of Hirsel (15); and in separate charters granted them
the lands of Rondes (18), the meadow of Bradspotes,
and the lands of Thotheryg, Spechenes, and Kalds-
treflat. He also granted them the pastures of
Thornidicke, and confirmed them in the pastures at
Gordon (35). The pastures at Gordon, and other
lands, were granted to the convent by Thomas de
Gordon and his son of the same name (36, 40).

The second Patrick, Earl of Dunbar or March, died
in 1248. Having married Christian or Euphemia,
daughter of Walter, the High Steward, he had a
son, Patrick, who succeeded him. In a series of
charters (2, 9, 16, 19), the third Earl Patrick granted
to the convent a croft in the village of Laynall,
the south town of Laynall, a carucate of land at
Haldherschill (Old Hirsel), and other lands at Iirsel.
He also, for the safety of his own soul and that of
his (second) wife Cecilia, bestowed on the nuns all
the land at Laynall which Sir Patrick Edgar had
igned to him as overlord. Sir Patrick’s charter of
ation (12), dated at Coldstream on Friday after
the “Feast of St Denys (18th October) 1273, refers to
“privileges granted or to be granted to crusaders.”
Sir Patrick Edgar, a descendant of Edgar, third son
of Gospatric, second Earl of Dunbar, is, in 1258,
named as a witness to a charter of confirmation by
Sir Robert of Polwarth to the church of Kelso.’

1 Edgar Collections, Grampian Club, pp. 1, 3.




PREFACE. niti

On the death of Sir Patrick Edgar, Mariota, his
widow, described as Lady of Hume, in return for
money paid her “in her urgent necessity,” surren-
dered her right to the north town of Laynall in favour
of the convent. She was second wife of William de
Hume or Home, whose son, Geoffrey de Home, swore
allegiance to Edward I. in 1296.7

On the 3d May 1263, during the lifetime of the
third Earl Patrick, and probably at his instance,
King Alexander III. issued at Roxburgh a royal
precept, taking the nuns of Coldstream under his
special protection, and providing that none should
take pledges of them for debt to another, but only
for their own (Appendix TIT.).

During the Border struggles in the war of inde-
pendence, the nuns of Coldstream suffered heavily.
King Edward I. was at Coldstream in August
1290.2 On Wednesday, 28th March 1296, in his
northern progress, he encamped at Coldstream with
5000 horse and 30,000 infantry. On this occa-
sion the priory and its orchard suffered extensive
damage, for which compensation was demanded by
Walter, master of the house, and six of his brethren.
They claimed £50 for wheat, rye, barley, malt, and
oats; £62, 15s. for cattle, sheep, lambs, and pigs;
also compensation for injury to the orchard, which is
estimated at the annual value of 100 shillings ; and

1 Ragman Rolls, 144.
2 Historical Documents, Scotland, 1870, edited by the Rev, Joseph Steven-
son, vol. i., p. 203.



xiv PREFACE.

for injury to the buildings and utensils, 100 shillings.
The demand, presented to Hugh de Cressingham,
Treasurer of Scotland, was complied with, partly in
kind, 700 sheep having been brought from the forest
of Athole, and by the sheriff thereof delivered to the
convent. A balance of £67, 8s. 4d. remained un-
satisfied (Supplement to Pref., I.).

In the following year the prioress and nuns of
Coldstream represented to the English council their
poverty, in respect of an obligation for £11, 4s. in
payment of corn and other victuals supplied to them
by the king’s servants at Berwick, on account of
which a writ in Exchequer had been issued against
them by Hugh de Cressingham, the Treasurer. Con-
sequent on this representation, the king issued a
mandate, on the 12th March 1296-7, restraining the
Treasurer from proceeding to enforce the exaction.
Tn a subsequent mandate, dated at Westminster, 21st
June 1297, Edward commanded the Earl of Surrey,
guardian, and Hugh de Cressingham, Treasurer, to
fully remit to the prioress and nuns the foresaid debt.

On the 9th June 1297, in a writ by King Edward
for levying arrears of charges made upon the goods
and lay chattels of religious houses in the counties of

3erwick and Roxburgh, in the bailliary of the Sheriff
of Northumberland, the prioress of Coldstream was
charged 14s," (Supplement to Pref., IT.).

Evidently about the same period an undated memo-

1 Historical Documents, Scotland, 1870, vol. ii, p. 173.



PREFACE. xv

rial was, by the prioress and nuns, presented to
Edward I. and his Privy Council, entreating that the
Sheriff of Northumberland might be authorised to
grant them scizin of their rents within his bailliary,
of which they had been deprived by the war. The
Council allowed the prioress to obtain a brief from
Chancery to the Sheriff of Northumberland, instruct-
ing him to certify what tenements were owned by
the convent within his bailliary before the beginning
of the war, and by whom these were at that time
held (Supplement to Pref., IL).

Patrick, Earl of Dunbar and March, third of the
name, married, about 1248, Christian, sister of Robert
de Bruce, afterwards one of the competitors for the
Scottish throne. He died in 1289, and was suc-
ceeded by his eldest son, Patrick, who confirmed
to the nuns of Coldstream the grants made by his
father of land at Laynall and houses at Berwick (14);
also the land of Whitchester and its pertinents,
and the lands held by the nuns at Bassendean and
Thornidich (57). THe died in 1309, leaving by his
wife, Marjory Cumyn, a son, Patrick, who became
Earl of Dunbar, fifth of the name. <A charter of the
land of Putanyshalwe (20), granted by him to the
nuns during his father’s lifetime, is the last donation
of the house to the nuns of Coldstream.

Among the other benefactors of the convent named
in the chartulary were members of the family of Haul-
tun, probably Hutton. Ranulf de Haultun granted



xvi PREFACE.

to the convent seven acres of land, described in the
charter (10) as being his possession “before the con-
version of his daughter Matilda,” a phrase implying
that she had entered the convent. To the nuns
William of Haltun confirmed (58) five acres of land,
which had previously been bestowed by his brother
Radulph.

From members of the family of Derchester, the
nuns obtained liberal benefactions. Walter, son of
Sir Thomas of Derchester, granted them twelve acres
of land in Huysheuigh, and twelve acres in Old Hir-
sel. This grant was confirmed by Walter, son of
Walter of Derchester (22); also by Thomas, son of
Walter, who confirmed to the nuns the grants made
by his father and predecessors. Thereafter Alan,
son of Thomas, granted and confirmed to Sir Walter
the chaplain, son of Walter, son of Swardy, an acre
of land called Cakewellegat, in the town of Der-
chester, which was to be held of the granter and his
heirs for the seddendo of one penny or a pair of
gloves (33). By Walter the chaplain, the land of
Cakewellegat, with an acre and a half at Coceflatte,
was conveyed to the convent.

Richard, son of Hugh the cook of Derchester,
bestowed on the nuns a toft, with a rood of land
adjacent, for the annual rent of one pound of cumin,
or three halfpennies, to be paid at the fair of Rox-
burgh (31).

To a charter of confirmation by Earl Gospatric



PREFACE. xvii

(11), one of the witnesses is Ernulf de Suinton.' By
charter (25), Alexander of Syntun (Swinton) granted
to the nuns the land of Totheryg (Todrig), which he
had received in gift from Sir Aymer de Makyswell
(Maxwell). John Swinton of that ilk let for ten years
to the prioress and nuns, the land of Little Swinton
(59), with entry at Whitsunday 1424. John Swinton
was killed at Verneuil on the 27th August thereafter,
whereupon William Drax, Prior of Coldingham, as
lord superior of the lands, continued the lease during
the minority of the heir; his renewal is dated 22d
July 1426 (60). An indenture bearing date 10th
October 1419, between John, prior of the cathedral
church of Durham, and his chapter, on the one part,
and Marion, prioress, and the convent of Coldstream
on the Tweed, narrates that lately John Swynton,
esquire, of Scotland, had given to the prioress in
pure alms all the lands in Little Swynton, which he
held of the said prior and convent of Durham, and
the prior of the cell of Coldingham, iz capite, by
military service, and also paying 13s. 4d. annually to
the said prior, etc., and 8s. for the king’s “ corrody.”
The prior and convent of Durham ratified and con-
firmed the said donation.*

1 This is believed to be the earliest oceurrence of the surname, and has
not been apparently noticed before. “Ernulf,” who obtained the grant of
Swinton from David L, had then no surname, but was simply styled “meus
miles” by the king (Coldingham Charters, Raine’s N, Ducham, appendix,
Nos. xii, xiii.)

* Raine’s North Durham, appendix, p. 114.
b




xviii PREFACE.

To the convent Thomas of Rauchburn granted
the meadow called Camminesmedu, in the terri-
tory of Thornidich (41), which was confirmed by
Thomas of Rauchburn, son and heir of William of
Rauchburn.

From the family of Male, afterwards Melville, the
nuns obtained considerable benefactions. Robert of
Maille granted to them seven acres in the field of
Bastynden (Bassendean—44). Thereafter William
of Mahile granted (45) them a toft and croft in the
village of Bastynden, with two acres of land, in pure
alms, for the souls of Earl Waldeve and his countess.
Further benefactions were bestowed by Robert of
May! (46), described as “nepos” of Garin of Mayle,
and Roger, son of William of Bastynden (47).

Donors to the convent on a smaller scale were
W——,, the boatman, burgess of Berwick (48); Roger
Nurys, burgess of Berwick (49); Robert de Bernham,
rector of the church of Tyninghame (50) ; William de
Salle (51) ; John de Dunbar, burgess of Berwick (52) ;
Thomas of Warndham (53); Ysouda, daughter of
Wido, glassmaker, of Alnwick (54); and John of
Plesset, in Northumberland (55).

On the 25th July 1333, Edward IIL granted
letters of protection to a number of persons, among
whom were the master of the Priory of Coldstream,
and the prioress and sisters of that house.! There
is no further notice of the convent till 1472, when on

1 Rotuli Scotie, i, 255, 256.



PREFACE, xix,

the 6th June of that year James HI. confirmed a
charter under the great seal, granted at Perth on the
23d July 1459, whereby his royal predecessor, James
II., bestowed on the convent the lands of Simpryn
(Simprim—A ppendix V.).

At Edinburgh, on the 24th February 1490, James
IV. granted a royal inspeximus of a charter in favour
of the prioress, Margaret Hoppringill,’ of a plough-
gate of land in the town of Lanele, in the sheriff-
dom of Berwick, granted on the 25th June 1489,
by John Liddell of Lanele—the reddendo being
a pair of hawking gloves, or twelve pennies
(Appendix VI.).

On the 3d May 1509, the prioress and nuns obtained
a royal letter under the privy seal, licensing them and
their retainers to hold communication with English-
men, and to traflic with them, in the season of war as
well as in times of peace. By the same instrument
the prioress and nuns were further authorised to
receive on their premises as many as twelve persons
from the sister kingdom, and to allow them to come
and depart as convenience suited (Appendix VIIT.).

The prioress obtained from James IV., on the 13th

1 Three members of the family of Pringle, or Hoppringle—Margaret,
Isabella, and Janet—were in succession prioresses of the convent, The
family of Hoppringle of Whitsome were zealous supporters of King
Robert the Bruce, and were afterwards stout adherents of the House of
Douglas, A family of the name of Pringle were for many generations pro
prietors of the estate of Lees, near Coldstream, now owned, through descent

from them, by Sir John Marjoribanks, Bart. Many of the convent lands
now form part of Lees estate.



XX PREFACE.

July 1510, a lease of the lands of Hirsel and Graden,
with their pertinents (Appendix [X., X.).

Though subsequently attached to English inter-
ests, Isabella Hoppringill, Prioress of Coldstream,
was, prior to the battle of Flodden in 1513, a zealous
upholder of Scottish rule. Immediately before the
battle, Sir David Home, who accompanied the Scottish
army, induced George, the eldest of his seven sons,
known as “the spears of Wedderburn,” to leave the
field and return home. On his journey George
visited his relative, the Prioress of Coldstream, who
upbraided him for abandoning the national cause.
Wounded by her invective, he rejoined the army and
fell mortally wounded.!| Subsequent to the battle, of
which the scene was only five miles distant, the
prioress aided through her retainers in the decent
interment of a portion of the dead. Such at least is
the tradition of the locality. During the troubled
period which succeeded the battle, the prioress,
Isabella, occupied an uneasy seat. From the proxim-
ity of the institution to the English border she be-
came attached to the cause of England.

The Duke of Albany having in 1515, in his capacity
as regent, seized the castle of Stirling, and thus
secured the person of James V., the young king,
Margaret, the queen-mother, entered into correspond-
ence with Lord Dacre, the English minister, in the
hope that her brother, Henry VIIL, would levy war

1 Drummond’s Noble British Families, ii, p. 20.



PREFACE. XL

on the regent, so as to compel him to restore her son
to her care and authority. During this correspond-
ence and attendant negotiations, she established her
abode at Blacader, a small town near Berwick, and
when there found in Isabella of Coldstream an in-
telligent and congenial companion. She recom-
mended the prioress and sisters to Lord Dacre’s
protection, and to her request on their behalf received
from his lordship the following answer :

“Mapame,—In my mooste humble wise I recommend me
unto your grace. And where it hath pleased you too desire me
for your sake too cause all Englishmen too forbere to doo any
hurtis unto the Priores of Caldstreme and hir hous, madame,
I shall with good will obserue your commaundemente and plea-
sure, she and hers doing ner supporting any too doo hurte to the
king, my souerain lord’s subiects, ner keeping ner receiving into
hir hous any Scottishemen of war. Madame, ther is no ser-
uaunte ye haue that shalbe more desireous too doo your grace
seruyce and pleasur than I shalbe, my poore honour saved ; and
God knoweth, not onely the king, my master, but I and all
other his subiects bee very sory of the war that is nowe betwene
England and Scotland, and wold nevir have attempted the same
but onely for the saufgard of the person of the ki ,
your sonne, thinking his royall person too bee in extreme
danger as long as he shalbe in the gouernaunce and keping of
the Duke of Albany and Frenchemen, whiche undoubtedly bee
more desireous too have hym king of that realme than the king,
your sonne, thinking that if they had hym King of Scotland,
they shuld foreuer have that land at their commaundement, by
whome Scotland hath had small proufite unto this daye. Great,
pitie it is too see so many noble and wise men in Scotland too
bee soo soore abewsed with the faire promyses of Fraunce as too
put their naturall souerain lord in the gouernaunce of hym
that is next the crowne and oute of the keping of his owne

Ss grace,



Xxii

subiects. Madame, I beseche your grace too bee contente that
I have thus playnly written unto your grace, whiche undoubt-
edly procedeth for the duty and love that I am bounde too bere
unto all your blod, beseching Almyghty God too send your grace
as moche joy of the king, your sonne, as your noble herte can
desire, with thaccomplisshemente of your moste hertieste desires.

“The said Priores of Caldstreme hath a protection of the
kingis grace.” ?

The following edict by Henry VIIL, for the protec-
tion of the prioress, Isabella, and her convent, was
issued on 1st July 1515:

“Teyry R.

“Tenry, by the grace of God, King of England and of Fraunce,
and Lord of Ireland, to all wardeynes and thayre lieutenants of
our marches foranempst Scotteland, capitaignes, gouvernours,
rulers, and ledres of oure peopple, aswell in tyme of warre as
peax, and to all maires, schiriffs, bailiffs, constables, and all
othere oure officers, mynistres, and subgietts, and to euery of
theym hering or seing these oure lettres, greting. Forasmouche
as we bee credibly enfourmed that the Pryorys of Caldstreme, in
Scotteland, lieng uppon the borders, towards oure said marches,
is often seasouns in tyme of warre invaded and dispoyled by
oure subgietts, and the religioux persounes there putte in suche
greate feare that they ne dare attende to thexecusion and mynys-
tryng of devyne seruice as they wold and aught to doo accord-
ing to thair profession, and also brought unto suche extreme
pouertie that they bee not of power to susteigne and relief
theym selfls. We remembring that in our solempn corona-
cion, and hooly enduction we bee professed to protect oure
Hooly Moder Churche and the mynystres thereof, haue taken,
and by these presents take, the said prioures and religious
women, thayre place, landes, townes, goodes, and catalles, with all
thaire seruauntes and tenauntes dwelling on thaire propre landes
and ferme holdis, with thair goodes and catalls, into our espicall

1 From the original in the British Museum, Cotton MS., Calig., B. iii. fol. 1.



PREFACE. xxiii

protection, tuycion, and saufegarde. Wherefore we woll and
commaunde you and euerye of you, that neythere in tyme of
werre ner of peax ye make any invasyon upon the said place
nor violentelye take anye goodes or catalles therunto belonging,
or mysentreat the religious persownes of the same, but rather
that ye doo shewe unto theym all the fauour and curtesye that
ye goodelye maye. And if it fortune theym to bee unmanerlye
entreated or iniuried, ye woll endenour you to the good and
undylaied refourmacion thereof, as ye entende our pleasour, and
woll avoyde the contrarye. Prouyded alwayes that the forsaid
persounes ne noon of theym invade any oure liege people, nor
also in any wise doo, or procure to bee doon under colour hereof,
any thyng which maye be preiudicall or hurtefull unto us, this
oure realme, or any our subgietts of the same. Geven under
oure signet at oure manour of Grenewiche, the furst daye of
Julye the viij" yere of oure reigne.”

In the spring of 1523, during the regent’s absence in
France, when Henry VIII. determined to make a war-
like incursion on the Scottish eastern border, Queen
Margaret again entreated that the prioress might not
be molested. <A letter which, on Dame Isabella’s
behalf, she despatched to the Earl of Surrey, as chief
Warden of the English border, proceeds thus :

« My lord, I comend me me (sie) hertlie to zon, and wyt ze I
am informyt yat ze ar cummyn to ye bourdo’™ fornent Scot-
land, and yar is ane gud frend and seruand of myn quhilk I ame
behaldyn to do for, quhilk wynnis in ye bordot of Scotland and
nerast to zour bourders of Ingland, and is prioress of ane puir
abbay of sestis callyt Caldstreme, and it is aperand to be gret
trubile one bay' ye sidis, and sche is nerest ye skay', and yat
place hes beine triblyt diuerss timis of befor, quharfor I pray
you ry* effectuisly yat for my saik yat sche and ye said place
may be wntriblyt, and to haf na skay’ be Inglismen, for yai

' Public Record Office, State Paper, Henry VILL, No, 2912.



xxiv PREFACE.

yat are gud sernandis and frendis to me thinkis yaj suld haif
favots of zou for my saik, as I trast ze will, and I belef sche has
ye kyngis grace my bro" his protectione to schaw, yrfor ze will
schaw zou mar kyndly to hiv, I haif not bene enmmyrsum to zon
in my desiris, and yis is resonable, quhilk I trast ze will not
refniss to do, sa yt sche may fynd kyndness wy zou for my
request, and God keip you. Subseriuit wy! my hand ye xxv
day of Merch instant.—Your frynd, Marcarer 2.
“To my Lord of Surray.”

Not long afterwards the Marquis of Dorset, who
acted under Surrey as Warden of the East Marches,
sent to Henry VIII. the following despatch :

“Please it yo" most noble grace to he advertysed that of late
the quene’s grace of Seotland, yo" suster, wrote her especiall
lettres of requeste as well to my lord your lientenante [Surrey]
as to ine, to forbere and save fro brennyng a poore religens house
of nunnes called Calestreme, the priovesse whereof her grace
reaportith to be very goode and kynd unto her, whereupon both
ny seyd lord lieutenante and I have graunted hyr requeste, and
have so writen unto her grace accordingly. Another cause
which moved us the sooner to assure the sayd house was by
cause the prioresse thereof is oon of the beste and assured spyes
that we have in Seotlond, for which cause we may not well spare
her. She lately sent us worde how that the quene’s grace is
deperted fro Starling, whether she doth not ascertain us, and hath
takyn wt hyr all the Frensshemen that were aboute the kingis
grace, hyr sonne, which I preye Gode be trewe; and as we shall
here and understonde more of her grace or other newes fro the
said prioresse, so shall yo" highenesse be advertysed from tyme
to tyme accordingly.” [The writer here informs the king what
“order had been taken” with the Tyndale and Redesdale men
by Surrey and others, Rantfe Fenwycke having brought in half
a score of the best as “suerties.” He thinks the arrangement a
good one, “ For they be the men which can do good service yf
they Iuste, and may evyll be spared when we shall make any
rode.” They and the Scottis have made no depredations lately],




PREFACE. XXV

“which is a great marvyle, and, as I here saye, have not oftyn

be seyn so longe continuying togueder. And thus the Holy

Trynite longe preserve yo" most noble grace.  Writen at

Alnewyke, the xvi daye of Aprill—Your moste hombyl

subjet, Tuomas Dorssert.’
“To the kingis moost noble grace.”

The prioress well earned her protection, for she
seems to have reported even her friend the queen’s
doings. Other letters prove her political activity.
In one she reports to Sir William Bulmer, who held
command on the eastern borders, that she had been
eight days “at Dunbreton, Glasko, and Sterlyn,” and
supplies full accounts of Albany’s military prepara-
tions, including the number and quality of his troops.”

When tidings reached her that the regent, with a
force of nearly sixty thousand men, was advancing
towards the eastern border to avenge the recent
incursion, Isabella wavered in her attachment to
English interests. But the repulse of Albany in
his siege of Wark Castle, at the very outset of his
operations, induced her to renew her adherence to
the southern cause. Surrey, who had heard of her
defection, had threatened the burning of her house—
a menace which again evoked on her behalf the
renewed intercession of her unfailing friend, Queen
Margaret. With Lord Surrey the queen communi-
cated in the following holograph letter :

“My lord, I commend me hartly to you, and I have r

1 Cotton MS,, Caligula, B. iii, f
2 These letters are calendared in Brewer's “ Letters and Papers, Foreign
and Domestic,” Henry VILL, Rolls Edn., 1867, vol. iii.

sayved




XXxvi PREFACE.

your vryting from James Rodarford, the berar, and onderstandyth
your wryting, and hath don as ye desyred me in the samyn
wryteing, as ze vol onderstand schortly.” [Here the queen
thanks Surrey for the good “intretment” he gave to her ser-
vant, and requests on behalf of the Abbot of Kelso that “na
ewel” be done to that place.] “Allso, my lord, towschyng the
Pryorez of Calstrem, I here say that ye are dysplesyd wyth her,
and that ze vol born her place. My lord, I vold trwst that ze
vol be betar lord to her for my sake, consideryng that I am
behaldyng to her more than to any othar of her degre, and
doth for me anythyng that sche can; wharefor I pray you
hartly, my lord, for my sake, to do her no hurt, not lat non do
her hurt.

« And I pray you, my lord, to haste the cawndyt wyth thys
berar to Calstrem, for I ynswr you ther is gret mattarz a do
at thys tyme, and it is to gret to vryt all, and therfor I pray
you, my lord, take a playn detarmynacyon of all mattarz or ze
delyver hym, and God kype you. Vryten thyz Seynt Kathren
ewen. Your Marcarer.t

[Addressed] “ To my Lord of Sowray.”

Two days after the date of this letter, being the
24th November 1523, Dame Isabella of Coldstream
sent hastily for Sir John Bulmer, who commanded
the garrison at Norham Castle, when an interview
took place, reported in the following letter despatched
by Sir John to Lord Surrey:

“Plessyth yt yowr lordshyp to knaw the Priores off Calld-
strym sent me word zysterday at iii off the clok to meghte
hyr at Gradonforde and speke wyth hyr, and so I mayde all
the haste I cowth, and I taryd ther ii howrs of hyr, and when
y' was daygayng, she com to me, and I askyd hyr why she

mayde me tary so long, and she sayde y* she had sych a fray,
y' she durst not com forth of hyr dors; and I askyd hyr be

« Cotton MS.,




PREFACE. xxvii

whome ? and she sayde be theym yt eury day was bessy vyth
hyr, who was hyr neyboris off Werk; and she prayd me to
Jat your lordshyp know y', whych I promessyd to do; and
then I askyd hyr why she sent for me; and she sayde yt a
servant off hyris was now comyn fro Edynborwgh, and he
browt hyr word y* thys Parlament at Edynborowgh was for a
maryage betwyx the kyng of Scottis and the Fransh kyngis
dowter, and thys she prayde me to send to yowr lordshyp,
and y' I shulld lat noyne other know y‘; for yif y* wer
known in Scotland y! she shullde speke off y', she wer undoyn
for ever: Allso she shewyd me y* ther is dyveris lordis y‘
coms not in, whether they wyll aggre to thys or nay she wots
not; bot she trowys rather ‘nay and zey.” She prayde me to
move yowr lordshyp to send som word to my cossyn, Sir
Wylzam Lysle, for hyr, or ells she must neds tayk som other
way for hyrsellff, for zonder wyll be no bydyng for hyr wyth
sych neghtborhede, as God knowyth, whome I besych preserve
yowr good lordshyp evermore. Att Norham, thy: vj day
of November, at iiij of the cloyk, be yowr howmbly,
“Joun BULMER.

[Addressed]

“To myne espescyall good lorde, my Lorde off Surry, in haste.
Haste poste, haste, hayst.” 7

From his mode of writing, and his expressed
anxiety that the missive might soon reach Lord
Surrey’s hand, it is obvious that Sir John Bulmer
had, by Dame Isabella, been won over to her side.
The story of a Parliament being assembled at Edin-
burgh to arrange a marriage between the young
king and a daughter of the French monarch was
simply a device of the prioress to excite the jealousy
of the English court, and induce Henry’s northern
lieutenants to resume their confidence in herself.

1 From original in Public Record Office.



NXViii PREFACE.

For the Prine

s Magdalen, only daughter of Francis
I, whom James V. espoused in 1
it appear that James
ever cherished the notion of her becoming his queen,

was then an

infant of four years; nor does

till captivated by her charms in France, a few weeks
before their marriage. Dame Isabella’s injunction
to secrecy was therefore more than necded, for while,
if known as a spy, she would have rendered herself
obnoxious to the regent, she had certainly, in her
own words, been “undone for ever,” if detected in
concocting a tale which might have superinduced
further war and bloodshed.

Dame Isabella Hoppringill was henceforth an un-
flinching supporter of the English policy, and that
of her patroness, the dowager-queen. In a letter by
xd to Cardinal Wolsey, on the
25, she is described as “a spy in the

Dr Magnus, address
24th January 15
pay of England.” Queen Margaret continued warmly

attached to her, as appears from a royal charter of
James V. (Supplement IV.), the tenor of which
represented in the following abstract :

“James [V.], King of Scots, considering that the prioress
and convent of his monastery of Coldstream show great
hospitality and are ever ready to receive and entertain the
ambassadors of England and other countries and also his
own ambassadors and other honourable persons, therefore, in
aid of their great costs, with consent of his dearest mother,
the queen, liferentrix of the under-mentioned lands, and of
the enroller of his accounts, grants in feu farm to Dame Isabella
Hoppringill, prioress, and the convent, and her s, the
lands of Iirsill, and the third part of the lands of Gradane,




PREFACE, XXIN

with its fishing, near said monastery, upon the marches of
the kingdom toward England, in the earldom of March, within
the sheriffdom of Berwick, extending in the king’s rental in all
profits to £36, 13s. 4d. annually; the prioress and her succes-
sors paying annually to the queen-mother, for her life, the sum
of £40 at Whitsunday and Martinmas, being an augmentation
of five merks on the former rental; the prioress and her succes-
sors also building and maintaining a sufiicient mansion on the
lands, with a hall, chamber, kitchen, barn, cow-house, pigeon-
house, ete. The great seal is appended at Edinburgh, 6th
September a.p. 1528, the fifteenth of the king’s reign.” !

On the 20th July 1535, at Stirling, James V.
granted an inspeximus of a charter of sale made by
Alexander Ellem of Butterdene to the Prioress Isa-
bella, of half a husband-land at Hirsel, with pertinents
(Appendix VIL). On the 8th May 1537, she re-
ceived a gift of the escheat of Alexander Heriot, in
Dernchester. The instrument of gift proceeds thus :

“Ane lettre maid to Dame Isobell Hoppringill, Priores of
Cauldstrame, and hir assignais, ane or ima, of the gift of all gudis
movable and unmovable, dettis, takkis, obligationis, soumes of
money, and vtheris quhatsumever, quhilkis pertenit to Alex-
ander Heriot in Dernchester, and now pertenyng, or onywys
salhappin or may pertene to or souerane lord, be resoun of
eschete throw being of the said Alexander fugitive fra the law,
and at the horne for the slauchter of vmquhill [ ], with
power, ete. At Edinburgh, the aucht day of Maii, the yere of

God I™v‘xxxvii yeris. Composicio x li. per signaturam.”?
Ss)

Dame Isabella Hoppringill died on the 26th
January 1537-8, as appears by the minute of election

1 Cotton MS., Calig,, B. ii., fol. 101.
2 Reg, See, Sig, lib. x. fol. 189,




XXX PREFACE.

of her successor, dated 23d February following.
The original instrument, in Latin, is given in Supple-
ment IV. ; it is here presented in abstract :

“To the Most Reverend Father and Lord in Christ, James
[Betoun], by Divine compassion Archbishop of St Andrews,
Primate of Scotland, and Jegatus natus. The nuns and convent
of Coldstream, considering that by the canons a regular church
should not be without a prioress beyond a month, and that
Isabella, the late prioress of honoured memory, formerly prioress
of the said monastery, had, on the 26th day of January previous,
as it pleased God, gone the way of all flesh, and her body
reverently been buried: the said nuns, in order that the monas-
tery might not longer lament the inconvenience of a vacancy,
forthwith, at the sound of the bell, more solito, had assembled
in chapter the 13th day of the said instant month, canonically
to celebrate the election of their future prioress, and to do all
and sundry other matters known to relate to the business of
such an election, as they had determined that to be the statutory,
lawful, and peremptory date for conducting the election. There-
fore, all and sundry the nuns of the said monastery, and all
others having, or thinking they had, interest in the matter,
having been cited by letter, after the mass of the Holy Spirit
had been devoutly and solemnly celebrated in their said monas-
tery, these nuns and convent, viz.: Dame Isabella Rutherfurd,
sub-prioress ; Katherine Flemyng, Jonet Broun, Mariot Ruther-
furd, Jonet Kingorne, Elizabeth Hoppringill, Katrine Stevin-
stoun, Cristina Todrik, Katrine Franche, Jonet Schaw, and
Ellen Riddell, all together assembling at the sound of the bell
as customary, in the chapter-house of the monastery, and deliber-
ately treating of the business of the election, the hymn, ‘ Veni
Creator, Spiritus, for the sake of imploring the Holy Spirit,
being sung by them on bent knees and with weeping voices,
and all other accustomed rites duly observed and finished, they
all and sundry, without any contrary voice, but altogether filled
with the Divine inspiration and enlightened by the grace of the
Holy Spirit, as they firmly believe, suddenly and unanimously,



PREFACE, XXXL

without concert or nomination preceding, but only having God
before their eyes, directed their wishes, with one voice and one
breath, upon Dame Jonet Hoppringill, a veiled and professed
sister of their house, marked out by her virtues as the person
most fit, worthy, and qualified, circumspect in spirituals and
temporals, and for the rule and governance of their said monas-
tery and its revenues, most able, expert, and industrious,
arrived at lawful age, born of lawful matrimony and of honour-
able parents, above others expert in the rule and religion of the
monastery, and elected the said Dame Jonet as their prioress and
pastress of their souls. At length this their choice being made
as set forth, they reverently, as is fitting, presented her to
the archbishop, desiring him to give his consent thereto. At
last the elect, after conferring maturely with certain of her
fellow-sisters and friends, although in her humility and
timidity asserting herself unworthy and unable to undergo
such a load, she many times would have declined, yet devoutly
bending the neck of her heart to the yoke of her Divine call-
ing, and having invoked the aid of the Divine clemency, humbly
assented to their wishes, sweetly undertaking the yoke of office
thus placed as for the best on her shoulders, and piously accept-
ing to the honour and glory of God Almighty and the most
Blessed Virgin Mary, under whose names the said monastery
was founded and raised; then they, with great rejoicing and
loud voices, singing the glorious hymn of God, ‘Te Deum
Laudamus,’ bells solemnly being rung, led her into the church
of the monastery in procession, and rendering thanks to God,
placed her before the high altar as usual; where a hymn being
sung, and the usual oration made, immediately their election
was declared to the clergy and people, and made public in
due form. Wherefore they entreat the most reverend father,
devoutly and humbly, to ratify the election thus canonically
observed ; that, God aiding them, the convent may under the
healthy rule and careful governance of their new shepherdess,
devoutly serve their Creator, and worthily carry on the Christian
warfare ; and they subscribe their names and affix their common
seal, and record the whole proceedings by a notary-public on
the date above written,” ete.



xxxii PREFACE.

Dame Janet Hoppringill’s election was doubtless
confirmed by the archbishop. She seems to have
been the last ruler of the convent, as the structure

was, in 1
Hertford.’ The eleven nuns mentioned in the pre-
ceding minute belonged to families whose names are

, burned to the ground by the Earl of

still common in the district.

During the reign of Edward I. seven male persons
are named in connection with the priory, these being
Walter, master of the house, with six friars (Supple-
ment I.). In the “Ragman Rolls,” we find that
“Wautier [Walter], persone del Eglise de Morton,
e Mestre de Caldestreme,” with other persons, swore
fealty to Edward I.

No vestige of the convent remains. A large
orchard occupies the site of the pomarium, which is
mentioned as early as 1296, when it was damaged by
the army of Edward I. In 1621, on the resignation
to Sir John Hamilton of Trabroun, it is termed the
“litle croft, callit the lyttle orchard.” In 1649, it is
indicated as the little croft called the pomarium.
The Earl of Haddington is superior of the land on
which the convent stood.

A tradition exists that the bell of the convent
was carried by the English to Durham, and sus-
pended in the cathedral of that city.

In the “Book of the Assumption of Benefices,”

1 From a MS. in Trinity College, Dublin, communicated by the late Mr
David Laing to the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland,



PREFACE. xxxiii

preserved in the Advocates Library (31, 3, 15), the
“Priorie of Cauldstreame” is valued thus: ‘“ In
money, £201; wheat, 3 chalders, 10 bolls, 2 firlots, 2
pecks; bear, 21 chalders, 8 bolls ; meale, 3 chalders,
10 bolls, 2 firlots,” which is described as “ payd out
of the lands of Lanaile and Hirsell, Todrig, Skait-
mure, Simprin, Whitchester, and out of Lanaile, Kirk
of Hirsell, and Bassinden.” The rent paid to the
Crown out of the surplus of the thirds of the bene-
fices in 1587, is named as £66, 13s. 4d.

The chartulary of the convent is preserved among
the Harleian MSS. in the British Museum. Ap-
pended to the record is a docquet, certifying that, on
3d April 1434, in the third year of Pope Eugenius
IV., and the 12th Indiction, John Laurence, licen-
tiate in decretals and notary-public, was by Mariota,
Prioress of Coldstream, and her convent assembled in
chapter, requested to make a transcript of their
charters and other muniments, which he accordingly
did. The reasons assigned for the transcription are
these: the age of the documents, and apprehension
of English invasion, which rendered them liable to
burning or other accidents. A transcript of the
chartulary, entitled, “ Diplomata Ecclesiw S. Marie
de Caldstrem,” is extant in Macfarlane’s Collections
in the Advocates Library.

The chartulary was long an object of attention
to antiquaries, and the council of the Surtees
Society nearly half a century ago recommended

c



Xxxiv PREFACE,

that it should be included in their series. This was
not done; and it has been reserved to the Grampian
Club now to bring the work before the public in an
authentic form. In 1850 the charters, rendered into
English, were privately printed by Mr William Wat-
son, in an octavo volume, entitled, “ Historic Memor-
ials of Coldstream Abbey, collected by a Delver in
Antiquity.” This work, not very skilfully executed,
has become extremely rare.

The seal of the convent is represented in the
accompanying engraving; it is taken from an im-
pression attached to one of several documents in
possession of the dean and chapter of Durham.

An engraving appears in Laing’s “Scottish Seals”
(Supplement, plate xv., fig. 5); but it appears to
have been copied from a somewhat worn impression,
and this has led Mr Laing to describe as “a cres-
cent” what is evidently the curled tail of a bee or
scorpion. Laing’s impression also differs from this



PREFACE. XXXV

seal in having the fish turned to the dexter, and
in having three instead of five quatrefoils. The
matrix of the seal is in the possession of Dr
William Martine of Haddington. It is of lead, and
has been reduced in size, by having the rim con-
taining the legend cut off.

To Mr Joseph Bain, F.S.A.Scot., the Editor
is indebted for the transcript from the Harleian
MSS., which has been used in the present volume.
Through diligent research in the Record Office and
elsewhere, Mr Bain has otherwise rendered important
aid. The Rey. Robert Paul, formerly of the Free
Church, Coldstream, now of Dollar, has, by supply-
ing local information and other useful materials,
rendered valuable help. Mr Dunbar of Northtield
has obligingly communicated an autotype of the
founder’s seal. M1 Thomas Dickson, of the General
Register House, has facilitated the transcription of
several original documents; and Mr Walter Macleod,
professional searcher, has rendered that important
service which might have been expected from his
well-known skill, ardour, and intelligence.

Cranes Rocers.

Grampran Lover,
Forest Hii,
May 1







CARTE
MONIALIUM DE CALDSTRE

CARTA DONACIONIS ET CONFIRMACIONIS TERRE DE LAYNAL,

1. OntBi
turis, Patricius Comes de Dunbar. eternam in Domino salutem
Nouverit uninersitas vestra nos dinine pietatis intuitu et pro
salute anime nostre et Cecilie sponse nostre. et pro animabus

antecessorum et sue

Christi fidelibus presentes litteras visuris ucl audi-

orum nostrorum . dedisse conces

se et

hac presenti carta nostra confirmasse . Deo et ecclesie heate Marie

de Caldestrem . et monialibus ihidem Deo serui
pet seruituris totam terram in villa et in tervitorio de Laynal .
jacentem sine aliqno retenemento que fuit quondam Domini
Patricii Edger militis . cum hominibus suis et sequela et bonis

ontibus et inper-

eortun et omnibus pertinenctis suis quam quidem terram dictus
Patricius Edger miles, nobis pro defectu seruicii de eadem terra
nobis debiti per fustum et baculum in plena curia reddidit et
resignauit et totum que suum quod habuit vel habere potuit

in eadem terra et pertinenciis suis pro se et heredibus suis nobis
quietum clamauit . inperpetuum tenendam et habendam eisdem
oribus ¢ et heredibus nostris

totam dictam [terram] sine aliquo retenemento per suas rectas

is de nobi

monialibus et succ

metas ct dinisas tam infra villam quam extra eum hominis

suis et sequela et bonis corm cum omnibus pertinenciis liber-
A

Fol. 1.



Vol, 2.

2 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

tatibus et aysiameutis et omnibus aliis ad dictam [terram] per-
tinentibus seu pertinere debentibus vel valentibus tam infra
yillam quai extra scilicet in moris et in marisiis in pratis et
pascuis in aquis in stagnis in piscariis et molendinis et omni-
Ins aliis sine aliqua subtraccione vel diminncione in liberam
puram et perpetuam elimosinam inperpettmm adeo libere quiete
plenarie et lonorifice sieut aliqua elimosina liberius quietius
plenins et honorificencius alieubi in toto regno Seocie ab aliquo
tenetur et possidetur Ne
terrain de Laynal . cum omnibus supradicti predictis monialibus

vero et heredes nostri totam dic

mM

cet successoribus suis contra omnes homines et feminas varant

abiums aquictabimus et inperpetuum defendemus. In euius rei

testimonium presenti seripto sigillum nostrmu apposuimus. Hiis
testibus . Dominis Patricio. Johanne. et Alexandro. filiis nostris .
Dominis Alano de Hormestur . Hugone de Gurlay . et Johanne
Letham . militibus . Domino Patricio de le Moestun  rectore
ecclesie de Scyrneside . tune temporis seneseallo nostro. Domino
Johame reetore ecclesie de Maldchamstok . cum multis aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM TERRE DE LAY.

LL.

2. Omnibus Christi fidelilus presens seriptum visuris uel andi-
turis . Patricius Comes de Dunbar. salutem in Domino. Nouerit

uniuersitas vestra me dedisse concessisse et hac presenti carta
mica confirmasse . Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem . et
mnonialibus ibidem Deo servientibus et inperpetuum seruituris
totam illam terram cum tofto ct erofto per suas rectas diuisas
quam terram Dominus Alanus cappellanns. filius Gileberti de

Ialsigton . tennit in villa de Laynal. et in te

itovio einsdam

ville. cum omnibus pertinenciis suis libertatibus et communibus
ay:
et perpetuam elimosinam inperpetuum tenendam et habendam

amentis ad [dictam] villam pertinentibus . in liberam poran

de me et heredibus meiis dictis monialibus libere quiete et

honorifice sient aliqua elimosina alicubi in toto regno Scocie

liberius quiecius plenius et plenarius ac honorificencius tenetur



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM, 3

et possidetur Ego uero Patricius et heredes mei. dictam terram
cum omnibus supradictis predictis monialibus contra onmes
homines warantizabimus et aquietabimns ac defendemus .
In cuius rei testimoniun presenti scripto sigillam meum
apposui . Hiis testibus Domino Patricio filio. Domino Alano de
Hormistun . Domino Johanne de Letame . Domino Johanne Gray.
Domino Gamel ecappellano. Domino Patricio de le Moctun
rectore eeclesie de Chirnsyde . Philippo de Halyburtinm . Adam de
Gordun . Villelmo de Hume . Roberto de Hellim . cum multis
aliis.

MACIO COMMUNIS COMITIS PATRICIT SUPER TERRA
DE SCAITHEMOR.

3. Comes Patricius omnibus litteras istas visuris et audituris

salutem . Sciatis me concessisse et hac mea presenti carta confir-
masse Deo et Sancte Marie et monialibus de Caldstrem ibident
Deo et Sancte Marie seruientibus .illam terram de Scaithemor
per suas rectas diuisas quam Normannus filins Normanni dedit

Amabile uxori sue in dotarium hane autem terram eiis conces

et hac mea presenti carta confirmaui saluo sernicio meo in per-

petuam elemosinam libere quiete et honorifice in pratis in
paseuis in aquis et in omnibus eiis pertinenciis ab omni servicio
et exaccione et consuetudine sicut aliqua abbatia aliquam
tervam liberius et quiecius tenet et possidet intuitu [caritatis] ct
pro salute animarum omnium antecessorum [meorum] sicut
carta Ricardi filii Normanni testatur et confirmat . Miis testibus.
-atricio filio Edger. et Waltero fratre suo . Patricio filio. Adam
Bernardo Fresell . Rolando Senechaldo . Rogero de Merley .

Roberto de Wallibus . Henrico de Forlincton . Ketel de Letham .
Waltero capellano . Thoma Freser . Magistro Adam Hastin
preposito. Roberto Morell. Adam persona de Kingorn . et multis
alii

Fol, 3.



Fol. 4.

4 CARTE MONIAL!

UM DE CALDSTREM.

CONFIRMACIO COMITIS PATRICI SUPER QUADAM CARUCATA TERRE
DE SCAITHEMOR,

is E
et futuri me concess
sse Deo et Sancte Ms
inonialilms de Caldstrem . terram de Scaithemor . per suas rectas

4. Comes Patricius uniuersis Sancte Ma sclesie fi

salutem . Sciant omnes presentes

8
se dedisse

et hae mea carta confirma e et sancti

dinisas sicut eam tenuit Adam filius Osberti. bane autem
terram eiis dedi in perpetuam elimosinam tenendam libere et

quicte et honorifice in pratis in paseuis in aquis et in

ab omni seruicio exaccione et cou-
suetudine sicut aliqua abbatia ter quietius possidet .
Hiis testibus. Willelmo canonico de Strivelin . Radulfo capellano .
Johame capellano.Gilberto Farser. Stephano Papdy dapifero .
Gilberto filio Walteri. Ketell de Letham. Waltero filio Adgavi.
Rodlond de Gurley , Ricardo Magistro Comitis . Vtredo filio
Gamell . Toma de Leinhal, Willelmo de Mouilon .

omnibus eius pertinenciis

un liberiu

CARTA DONACIONIS TERRE DE SCAITHEMOR PER RICARDUM FILIUM
NORMANNIL

Ricardus filius Normanni de Leinhal . omnibus Sancte Matris
Ecelesie filiis salutem , Sciant omnes presentes et [uturi me
vata confirmasse Deo et
nete Marie et monialibus de Caldstrem. Deo et Sancte Marie
seruientibus illam ter
diuisas quam pater meus Normannus dedit matri mee Amabile

concessisse et dedisse ct hac mea

un de Seaithemor, per suas reetas

in dotarium . hane autem terram eiis dedi in perpetuam elimo-
sinam tenendam libere et quiete et honorifice in pratis in
pasenis in aquis et in omnibus eius pertinenciis ab omni
servicio et exaccione et consuetudine sient aliqua Abbacia
aliquam tervam liberius et quietius tenet et possidet . pro anima
Comitis Waldeui et Comitisse Alin sponse eius.et pro salute
s Comitis Pate

corpor et pro audna eis .et pro anima Comi-



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

tisse Ade sponse eius.et pro anima patris et matris mice. et
pro anima mea.et pro anima sponse mee.et pro animahus.
antec

orum et successorum meoruu. et pro animabus om-
nim fidelium defunctorum . hiis testibus . Domino Willelmo .
Magistro Adam de I
Warino de Solt
Letham . Astino de Birgham . Roberto Morell, Ranulfo de
Heueltuno . Alano filio Etherdi. Ricardo capellano . et multis

aliis .

stro Henri

. o de Eeclis . Magistro
Ketel de Letham. Alexandro persona de

CARTA CONFIRMACIONIS TERRE DE SCAITHEMOR PER QUANDAM
MULIE

mete Matris Ecelesie filiis et fidelibus visuris
Aanabilis

Salutem . Nouerit uniuersitas vestra me conces

6. Omnibu

vel audituris has liter uxor Normanni de Leynal . F

se et hae
earta mea confirmasse Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Cald-
stvem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus . dotalium meum
de terra de Seaithemor inperpetunm.in liberam et puram et
perpetuam climosinam sient carta R. filii mei eti
testatur et confirmat lane autem terram concessi eis pro
salute anime mee et omnium antecessorum et suce:
meorun . si vero aliquo tempore aliquod instrumentum inven-
tum fuerit seu prolatum ab aliquo meorum vel aliquibus aliis
volo et concedo ut nullas omnino vires obtineat . Vt autem
hee concessio rata et inconcussa jure perpetuo [perseuerit]
Dominus H. Abbas de Kelcho. et R. filius mens sigilla sua
una cum

inde collata

oruun

igillo [meo] huie scripto apponi feccrunt intesti-
monium. hiis testibus . Domino H,. Abbate.et TR. priore de
Kelcho. Toma de Gordun . Ricardo filio meo. Domino Johanne
elimosinario . et Rogero C
aliis .

whet. monachis de Kelcho. et multis

CARTA SUPER INTEGRA DONACIONE ECCLESIE DE LAYNAL,

7. Comes Patricius de Dunbar onmibus hominilus suis et
i salutem .

‘ciant presentes et futuri me




Fol. 6.

Fol. 6,

6 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTR

dedisse et concessisse et hac mea carta confirmasse Deo et sancti-

monialibus de Caldstrem totam ecclesiam de Laynall integre eum

omnibus pertinenciis suis pro salute anime mee et predeces-
sorum et successorum meorum tenendam in perpetuam elimo-
Cospatricii . et
Comitis Waldeui patris mei. confirmant ct protestantur et sicut

sinam sicut carte predecessorum meorum Comit:

aliqua climosina liberius tenetur in regno Scocie . hiis testibus .
Adam filio Aldin . Patricio filio eius. Bernardo Farser . Gilberto
filio Walteri. Gilberto filio Aldin. Ketill de Letham . Gilberto
persona de Witingham. Adam persona de Hirsill. Adaccus de
Home . Roberto Bagge . Willelmo filio Patri
Faunesse . et multis al

- Ricardo de

CARTA DE FUNDACIONE DOMUS DE CALDSTREM PER
COSPATRICIUM COMITEM.

8. Cospatricius comes. omnibus suis probis hominibus theinis.
et drengis clericis et k
tem. Notum sit vobis me ded:
ibus de Witchou . ihide

stam futuris quai presentibus salu-

e et cone Deo et soror:

nm Deo sernientibus dimidiam ecclesie

de Laynall. cum dimidia carucata terre et unam carucatam
terra silicet dimidiam de terra de Laynall. et aliam dimidiam
de terra de Birghame .in perhenni climosina et sciatis quod
sponsa mea Derder dedit ciis unam carucatam terre de terra
de Hirsi
confirmo et sciatis me dedisse eiis dimidiam carucatam terre
de terra de Laynall . ew Addoe cox!
num filiam Edulfi dedi
unam carneatam et dimid

I. ct ecclesiam de eadem villa quam ego coucedo et

ata mea. et sciatis Norman-

et conce: dem amonialibus

e 0

aun de terra de Laynall . concensu meo

et Normanni heredis sui. et ideo illud contirmo et percipio vt
istas elimosinas nominatas predicte moniales libere et quiete
et honorifice perpetuo teneant sieut aliqua elimosina liberius
et inclins tenetur . Hiis testibus. Waltero filio meo. Chetel de
Letham . G. Fresell . Haldano Dapifero . KR. Bloet . 2. filio
Hernebaldi .



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM

~

CARTA DONACIONIS ET CONFIRMACIONIS
COMITEM PATRICIUM.

ERRE DE LAYNAL PER

fidelibus presentes literas

9. Omnibus Chris' visuris vel audi-
turis . Patricius Comes de Dunbar. eternam in Domino salu-
tem . Nouerit wniuers

as vestra me diuine pietatis intuitu et
pro salute anime me (sic). et Cecilie sponse mee. et pro animabus
antecessorum et successorum meorum . dedisse concessisse et hac
presenti carta mea confirma Deo et ecclesie heate Marie de
Caldstrem . et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus . et inper-
petuum seruituris totam terram meam in villa de Laynal . silicet
le Suthtun de Laynal . cum omnibus pertinenciis suis libertatibus
et aysiamentis et omnibus aliis ad dictam terram pertinentibus
tam infra villam quam extra. sili

ot in moris marisiis in pratis
in. viis

et pascuis in aquis et stangnis
can

et semitis in pis-
et molendinis sine aliqua retencione substraccione vel

diminucione . in liberam puram et perpetuam ¢limosinan
inperpetuum tenendam et habendam . dictis monialibus de
me et heredibus

mciis .adeo libere quiete plenarie et honoritice
sieut aliqua elimosina liberins quiecius plenarius et honoriti-
cencius alicubi in toto regno Scocie ab aliquo tenetur et possi-
detur, Ego uero Patricius . et heredes mei. dictam terram silicet
de le Suthtun de Laynall , cum omnibus supradictis predictis
monialibus contra omnes homines et feminas warandizabinius.
acquictabimus et inperpetuum defendemus . in cuins rei testi- Fol. 7.
monium huie presenti seripto sigillum meum apposui . hiis
testibus . Domino Roberto de Kokeburn . Domino Roberto de
Hellum . Domino Patricio filio Walteri. Domino Johanne de
Letham. militibus. Domino Johanne persona de Haldehamstoc .
Domino Patricio persona de Chirnsyd. Philippo de Haliburtun .
Toma Papedy . Waltero de Derchestyr . et al

CARTA CUT

DEM T

RRE QUE IACET PROPE ANT
TERRITORIO DE L.

SLAU IN

10. Sciant omnes tam presentes quam futuri quod ego. Ran-



8 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

dulfus de Haultan. concessi et dedi et hac mea presenti carta
confirmaui . Deo et Sancti Marie et sanctimonialibus de Cald-
strem. illas viit™ aeras terre que iacent inter terras illarum prope
Anttaslau.que mee erant ante conuersionem filie mee Matilde .
orum

pro anima patris mei et matris mee et pro animabus anteces
et successorum et pro anima mea el pro anima sponse mee Sierith .
in liberam puram et perpetuam elimosinam ita libere et quiete
sicut aliqua elimosina in regno Scoturum liberius et quiecius
tenetur et possidetur . hiis testilns . Ricardo de Laynall. Magistro
Adam de Herishille , Hastingus de Byrgham . Roberto de Morell .
Toma de Copland. Alanus de ITirsell. Galfridus capellanus. Bar-

tholomeus capellanus . et plures ali

AL EY BIRGHAM ET DE
HILL!

CARTA CUIUSDEM TERRE DE LA
ECCLESIA DE HE:

11. C. comes omnibus probis hominibus suis thenis et drengis

tam presentibus quam futuris salutem . Notum
» Deo et sororibus de Witehoh

clericis et laye

sit vobis me concessisse et dedi

ibidem Deo sernientibus . nam carucatam terre scilicct dimidiam
carucatam de terra de Laynall. et aliam dimidiam de terra de
shan . et seiatis quod Derder Comitissa sponsa mea . dedit
fc hile et
eccles et Nor-
mannus dedit eiisdem wnam dimidiam earucatam de terra de
aynall in perhenni elimosina que ego omnia concedo et con-
firmo pro salute animarum nostrarum soluta et quieta de
omnibus peruitiis inperpetuum et ita libere sieut aliqna religio
aliquam elimosinam liberius et melius tenet . Testibus Derder
Comitissa . Waldef filius comitis . Lambekin dapifer . Ernulfo de
Suinton . Roberto le Norreis. Adam filio Meldredis . et aliis .

Bi

dem sororibus unam carucatam de terra de Heri

am eiusdem ville cm omnibus pertinenciis

CARTA QUITE CLAMACIONIS TERRE DE LAYNAL PER PATRICIUM
FILIUM WALTERT C,

iptum visuris vel audituris . P. filius

Omnibus hoe
Walteri dictus Edger eternam in Domino salutem , Nouerit uni-




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. “

uersitas vestra me pro me et heredibus meiis firmiter teneri et
fide media obligari magistro priorisse et conuentui de Caldstrem Fol,
al quietum clamandum et omnino resignandwm per fasta et
baculum totum jus meum de terra mea de Laynall ew omni-
bus pertinenciis suis sine aliquo retenemenio cum omnibus
hominibus meiis Domino meo Patricio Comiti de Dunbar al
infeodandum moniales de Caldstrem quameunque magistro et
monialibus placuerit quod nisi fecero subicio me et heredes
ineos jurisdiccioni dominornm episcoporwn Santiandree et Glas-
guensis et corum officialinm archidiacorum et diaconorum qui
pro tempore fuerint quorum unus vel duo de predictis quem-

cunque vell quoscunqne magister priorissa et conuentus eligere
voluerint possit vell possint nos compellere quamlicuit quam
cohercitacione voluerint vel yoluerit propter fidei dacionem ad

dictam resignacionem et quietam clamacionem dicto comiti faci-

ssa et conuentus voluerint

endum vbiennque dicti magister prio

tam infra curiam dicti comitis quam extra omni cauillacione

e Renunciando in

cepcione dilacione et appellatione posposit
hac parte omni juris remedio et auxilio canonici vel ciuili et

omnibus priuilegiis indultis ct indulgenidis cruce signatis et
aliis omnibus que contra presens seriptum aliquo modo obict

possunt et que mihi Patricio vel heredibus meiis possint pro-

desse et dictis magistro priorisse et conuentui obesse . Tn cuins

vei testimonium in presencia virorum multorum fidedignorwm
presentibus literis Sigium meum apposui Data apud Caldstrem

die veneris proxima post festa Sancti Dyonisii anno gra

Mr com septuagesimo tercio .

CARTA QUITECLAMACIONIS CUIUSDAM TERRE DE LAYNAL.

13. Omnibus [has] literas visuris vel audituris, Mariota Domina
de Hume quondam sponsa Domini Patricii Edeger salutem in
tas [vestra] me in legitima
viduetate mea dedisse concessisse et quietum clamasse totum

Domino sempiternam . Nouerit vniue

jus meum quod habui vell habere potui infra villam de Laynall Fol. 10,



10 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

inenciis et
dictam villam pertinentibus vel spectare valentibus Deo et beate
Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo sernientilus et
in perpetuuin sernituris adeo libere et quicte sieut aliqua vidua

et extra scilicet de Lenorthtun cum omnibus pe

in regno Scocie in sua viduetate possit concedere sine dare pro
qnadam summa pecunie mihi in mea vrgenti necessitate soluta In
igillum meum est
appensum . Hiis testibus. Domino Villelino vicario de Assinden
tune magistro de Caldstrem .Villehno Franke de Peteokyr
Malcolno de Haukyrstun. Villelmo de Avdros cappellano.. Toma
de Derchester . Alano Vyte de Derchester. et a

cuius rei testimonium huie presenti seripto

CARTA CONFIRMACIONIS TERRE DE LAYNAL ET DE QUIBUSDAM
DOMIBUS IN BERUWYCO.

14. Omnibus hoe seriptum visuris vel andituris . P. filius
Domini P. Comitis de Dunbar. salutem in Domino seimpite
nam . Nove

itas nestra nos confirmasse Deo et ecel:

ie
beate Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo et beate Marie

sernientibus totam illam terram quam predicte moniales in villa
et in tervitorio de Laynall ex collacione domini patris nostri tenent
in
vico de Rannnisden super le Nesse quas domus ex collacione
domini P. comitis patris nostri habent.Tenendas et habendas
predictis monialibus adeo libere et quiete sient carte earnndem
a predicto domino I. comite pat:

una cum domibus de Berewyco que erant Danid Scissori

> nostro predictis monialibus
de predictis perfecte plenius et melius proportant et attestantur
in se. In cuius rei testimonium presenti seripto sigillum nos-
trum appostiinus hiis testibus P.de Dunbar filio nostro. Dominis

Fol. 1. Johanne Alexandro fratribus nosiris . Magistro Henrico de le
Monchtun rectore ecclesie de Duns . Mauricio clerico et aliis.



CARTE MONJALIUM DE CALD: IL

Tiweipiunt Carte Lerravum et Keclesie de Hersil.

CARTA DONACIONIS ET CONFIRMACIONIS ECCLESIE DE HERSILL
PER P, COMITEM.

15, Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filtis et fidelibus tam pre-
sentibus quam futuris visuris vel audituris has literas Willelims
filius Patricii salutem. Nouerint omnes tam presentes quam

[futuri] me intuitu caritatis dedisse et concessisse et hac carta
Deo et ceclesie Sancte Marie de Calc
monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et seruituris eeclesiam de
Herissille cum te

ad predictam ecclesiam iuste pertinentibus in liberam puram

nea confirma: strem et

is decimis et obuencionibus et omnibus aliis

et perpetuam eclimosinam ita libere quiete honorifice et plenarie
sicut carte Comitis Cospatricii et Comitis Waldeui et Patricii
patris mei testantur et confirmant et sicut aliqua ecclesi

in regno Scocie liberius quiecius honoriticencius et plenius

tenetur et possidetur hiis testibus Patricio comite . Patricio tilio
eins . Rogero de Menlei. Vatricio filio Adam . Alano de Rule.
Magistro Radulfo Sancti Andree Archidiacono , Magistro Laur-
encio officiali . Joanne decano de Fogo. Magistro Henrico de
Keeles . Patricio persona de Duns. Magistro Ade de Herissille .

Alexandro persona de Letam. Toma Vers

- et multis aliis .

CARTA DE UNA CARUCATA TERRE IN HALDIUERSILL,

16. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens seriptwn visuris uel
audituris Patri
ternam . Nouerit vniuers

ius Comes de Dunbar salutem in Domino sempi-

as vestra nos diuine pietatis intuitu
pro salute anime nostre et pro animabus antecessormm et suc-
ces

‘orm nostrorum concessisse dedisse et hae presenti carta

nostra contirmasse Deo et ecclesie beate Marie de Caldstrem
et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et in perpetuum serui-
twis wnam carucatam terre in Haldhirsehyll cum ommibus suis

pertinenciis sine aliquo retenemento illam scilieet carucatam




Fol, 13.

12 os

© MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM,

quan Walterus dictus eapellanus . filius Valteri. filii Thome

qilitis de Derchestyr.de nobis hereditarie tenuit et quam

dietus Walterus nobis pro defeetu seruicii de eadem terra nobis

debiti in plena curia nostra pro se et heredibus suis

per fustin
ignanit et omnino quietum clam-
auit Tenendam et habendam dictis monialibus et suec
suis de nobis et heredibus [nostris} totam dictam terram in mori:

et baculum sursum redidit r

ssoribus:

maresiis pratis pascuis pasturis molendinis cum omnibus suis
pertinenciis libertatibns et aysiamentis omnimodis . In lib-
eran puram et perpetuam elimo:
quiete plenarie et honorifice si
quiecius plenius et honorific

nam inperpetuum adeo libere
ent aliqua elimosina Tiberius

sneius alicubi in toto regno
Xcocie ab aliyuo tenctur seu possidetur , Nos uero et heredes
nostri totam predictam terram eum omnibus supradictis
prenominatis monialibus contra omnes homines et feminas
warandizabimus acquietabimus et defendemus in perpetuum .
Tn cuius rei testimoninm presenti scripto Sigillum nostriun
appostinms hiis t
Johame et Alex

stibus Domino Patricio filio nostro, Dominis

ndro filiis nostris. Domino Alano de Hor-
inistin . Domino Gilberto de Rowle. Thoma Papedy . Petro de
Gordon . et aliis .

CONFIRMACIO COMITIS PATRICIL SUPER ECCLESIA DE ILERSILL,

17. Universis Matris Eeclesie filiis et fic

quain futuris visnris vel anditw

elibus tam presentibus

has literas I. Comes de Dun-

Hutem . 2

har

ouerit Onmes tam presentes quam futuri me

intuitu caritatis concessisse et hae earta mes

contirmasse Deo
et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem
Deo sernientibus et sernituris ecc

esiam de Terisehill eum
terris decimis et obuencionibus et omnibus aliis ad predictam
ecclesiam inste pertinentibus in liberam puram et perpetuam
elimosinam ita liber sicut carte
Cospatrieii . et Comitis Waldeui et. Patricii anunculi

quiete honorifice et plenarie

Comiti
mei. et Willehni filii sui. testantur ct comfirmant et sicut aliqua



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTR

elimosina in regno Scocie liberius quiecius honorificencius et
plenius tenetur et possidetur hiis testibus Patricio filio comitis .
Willehuo filio Patricii . Rogero de Mevrlei

Fergus filio comitis . Thoma Ferser tune clerico comitis . et aliis.

lano filio Kdgari

CARTA DONACIONIS

BRE QUE DICITUR RONDE:

ET BRADSPOTIS.

18, Omnibus Christi fidelibus Villehnus filins Patric
Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me diuine p

Jutem .

statis intuitu et pro
anima mea et pro animabus patris mei et matris mee et
omninm antecessorum et successorum meorum dedi
c

con-
sisse et hae presenti carta mea confirmasse Deo et Sancte

Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo sernientibus
terram que dicitur Rondes et pratum que vocatur Bradspotes in

territorio meo de Ter

iL. Tenendam et possidendam de me
et heredibus meiis inperpetunm in pam et perpetnam climos-
imam adeo libere qniete plenarie pacifice et honorifice ab omni
seruicio seculari et consuetndine et exaceione et demanda

Jiberiu

sient aliqua elimosina in toto regno regis Seoci
qu

scius plenarius et honorificencins tenetur et possidetur |
testibus Rogero de Merlai. Thoma de Gordon . Edwardo de Fol. 1
Wallibus . Andrea capellano . Uifride cappellano . Patricio
diacono . Henrico diacono , Alano Merseallo . Alano de Tersill.

Thoma filio Gilberti . et aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDAM TERRE JACENTIS TUXTA LET IN
TERRITORIO DE WERSILL,

19, Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie fili
uel andituris

has litte
-atricius Comes de Dunbar salutem eternam in

s visuri

Domino . Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me caritatis intuitu et

pro salute anime mee et meorum dedisse concessisse et hac
presenti carta mea confirmasse Deo et Sancte Marie de
Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus terram illam
sil que iacet iuxta Let e

apud Her: anstrali parte pontis




lt CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDS'

REM.

eam eisdem perambulaui habendam et tenendam de me et
heredibus meiis in puram et perpetuam elimosinam ita libere
et quiete sicut aliqua elimosina liberius uel quiecius datur in
regno Scocie . Ego autem et heredes mei dictam terram dictis
monialibus contra omnes hominis warandizabimus et ut hee
donacio mea rata sit et inconcussa presenti scripto Sigillum
meum apponi feci hiis testilus Dompno Abbate de Melros.
Domino Papedy tune temporis senecaldo. Domino Johanne
tilio Symonis
Burche . David de Grame . Petro et Henrico capellanis . Patricio
filio Comitis . Patricio filio Comitis de Atholia . Waltero filio
Rogeri . Patricio Sautemareis . et aliis multis .

Domino Johanne filio Waldeni . Domino David de

CARTA TERRE QUE DICITUR PUTANYSHALWE IN TERRITORIO DE

HERSLL.

20, Universis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis has litteras visuris
audituris . Patricius filius Domini Patricii Comitis de Dunbar
niles

alutem in Domino. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me diuine

Fol.

pietatis intuitu et pro salute anime mee et antecessorum et suc-

cessorum meorum dedisse concessisse et hac presenti carta mea
confirmasse Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et sancti
monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et inperpetuum seruituris
totam illam terram juxta Let que vocatur Putanyshalwe scilicet
de Let ex parte orientali totaliter usque ad terram dictarum
inonialium Tenendam et habendam de me et heredibus meiis
in puram et perpetuam elimosinam adeo libere quiete et scilicet
na liberius quiecius vel honori-

pacifice sicut aliqua elimos

ficencius datur in regno Scocie . Ego antem et heredes mei
dietam terram dictis monialibus contra omnes homines et
feminas warandizabimus acquietabimus et defendemus et ut
hee donacio mea rata sit et inconcussa presens scriptum sigilli
mei inpressione roboraui testibus Domino P. Comite patre meo.

Domino P. Eger. Domino Alano de Ormistun. Dominis P. de




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTRE 15

Sympring. Johanne de Millyaus. Willelmo de Llaynall. Adam
Tunnoe de Kalchow . Waltero de Derchester . cum multis aliis .

CARTA CUIUSDEM TERRE IN DERCESTYR ET IN VETERI HERSIL

21. Vniuer: anete Matris Ecclesie filiis presentibus et
futuris has litteras visuris vel audituris Walterus [filius]
Domini Thome de Dercestria salute. Nonerit uniuersitas vestra

me concessu et assensu heredum meorum dedisse concessisse et
hae mea presenti carta confirmasse Deo et beate Marie de Cald-
strem et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus xii acras
terre que iacent propinquiores terre mee in Huyisheuigh
in anstrali parte et xii acras in Veteri Herissill
in una cultura et quingne acras in alia cultura ex australi
miei et pro animabus

scilicet vii acras

parte pro anima mea et pro anima pat:
antecessorum et succes

run meorum et pro participacione
beneficiornm que in prefata abbacia fiunt uel fient . Tenendas
de me et heredibus meiis in pwram et perpetuam elimosinan
sicut aliqua elimosina liberius quiecius et decencius tenetur uel
possidetur hiis testibus Willelmo capellano Domini Comitis.
Waltevo capellano de Laynal . Johanne capellano de Hersill.
Thoma Stafly . Domino Mauricio Brun . Willelmo filio Thome . et
Eleseo fratre

suo. et alijs.

CONFIRMACIO. CARTE PRE

22. Omnibus Christi fidelibus hoe seriptum visuris vell andi-

turis Walterns filins Walteri de Dercestria salutem in Domino.
Nouerit uninersitas vestra me concessisse et hae presenti carta
mea confirmasse Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et
monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et inperpetuum seruituris
totam donacionem quam eisdem monialilms fecit pater mens
videlicet xii acras terre que iacent propinquiores terre me
in Huyisheuigh in australi parte et xii acras in Veteri Her-
sill . videlicet em acras in una cultura et qninque acras

Fol. 16.




Pol. 17,

Pol, 18.

16 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

in alia cultura ex anstrali parte pro anima mea et pro animabus
antecessorum et succi

sorum meorum et pro participacione
beneficiormm que fiumt in monasterio de Caldstrem et inper-
petuum fient Tenendam et habendam dictis monialibus de
dictam terram de me et heredibus meiis
in puram perpetuam et liberam climosinam adeo Tibere quicte

me et heredibus meiis

plenarie ct honorifice sient aliqua elimosina liberins yniecius
et honorificencius alicubi infra comitatuin de Dunbar tenctur
» nero Walterus et heredes dictam tervam pre-
homines et feminas waran-

et possidetur .

nominatis monialilms contra onme:

dizabimus defendemus et acquietabimus . In cniis rei testi-
monium presenti scripto sigium meum apposui hiis testilus
Domino P. filio Walteri . Domino Roberto de Neshit . milliti-

Ins. Rogero de Hhune. Gilberto de Toeheryg . Waltero firmario

Domini Comitis de Mersill. et aliis

XFIRMACIO CARTE PRE

Onmibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel
audituis . Thomas filius Walteri de Dereestyr salutem in
Domino sempiternam . Noueritis ine pro me et heredilus meiis

concessisse et hac presenti carta me confirmasse Deo et ecclesie
Sancte Marie de Caldstrem ct sanctimonialibns ibidem Deo

seruientibus et inperpetnum seruituris

ommes terras posses-
siones et libertates a patre meo et predecessoribus meiis datas
itoriis de Haldhersill et de Scaymor cum

et concessas in te

. Tenendas et habendas de me et

omnibus. pertineneiis sui
heredibus metis inperpetuum adeo libere quiete plenarie pacifice
et honoritice sieut aliqna elimosina liherius quiecius plenarins
et honori in comitatu de Dunbar tenetur et possidetur .
Ego [Thomas] uero et heredes meii dict
et libertates cum omnimodis aysiamentis suis et pert

icenciv

terras possessiones

nenciis
ejisdem monialibus warandizabimus et contra omnes inper-
peti defendemus . In euius rei testimonium presenti scripto
sigillum meum apposui hiis testibus Domino Galfrido rectore



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 17

de Lintun. Domino Willelmo vicario de Hastynden . Petro de
Gordon . et multis aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS TERRE DE THOTHERYG ET SPECIE
CALDESTREFLAT.

24. Sciant omnes tam presentes quam futuri quod ego Willel-
nus filius Patricii dedi et concessi et hac presenti carta confir-
maui in pwram et perpetuam elimosinam Deo et Sancte Marie
et monialibus de Caldstrem ibidem Deo seruientibus totam
terram quam tenent in feodo meo de Hersill scilicet terram que
vocatur Thotheryg et Spechenes et Kaldestreflat . ita libere et
quiete et honorifice ab omni sernicio sicut aliqua perpetua
elimosina in regione Scotorum quiecius tenetur et possidetur
Hiis testibus Patricio filio Ade. Bernardo Fersor, Rogero de
Merlay. Neso de Valtun. Ketello de (sic) Johanne archidiacono.
Magistro Ad’ de Hersill, Tho. de Coupland. Edwardo de Red-
peth . Patricio filio Ricardi. et pluribus ali

LITTERA QUIETE TERRE DE THOTHERYG PER A. DE 8,

25. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presentes litteras visuris vell
audituris Alexander de Syntun salutem in Domino . Nouerit
uniuersitas vestra me dedisse concessisse et quietum clamas
et hae presenti carta mea confirmasse pro me et heredibus meiis
priorisse et conuentui de Caldstrem . totam terram de Totheryy
per suas rectas diuisas cum omnibus suis pertinencijs liberta-
tibus et aysiamentis ad dietam terram pertinentibus et totwa
jus quod habui in eadem et suis pertinencijs et ipsos prior-
issam et conuentum in omnibus premissis meos assignatos
fecisse inperpetuum . Quamquidem terram.habui ex dacione
et concessione Domini Aymeri de Makyswell et heredum
suornm Tenendam et habendam dictis priorisse et connentui
vel assignatis suis adeo libere quiete plenarie et honorifice sieut

carta prime infeudacionis dictis monialibus facta vel carta
B

ie

Fol. 1




18 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

quam super dicta terra scilicet elimosinata habent
plenius testatur et proportat Ego vero et heredes mei super
omnibus que ab heredibus Domini Aymeri de Makeswell de
dicta terra vel suis pertinencijs aliquo modo peti poterunt vel
exigi inperpetuum plene vespondebimus In ecuius rei testimo-
nium presenti scripto sigillum meum apposui testibus Magistro
Johanne de Muskilburg tune temporis oficiali archidiaconatus
Teuidalie. Magistro Nicolayo de Syntun. Johanne de Lilliscline.
Hugone de Drunsdalle . Mauricio capellano ..Alexandro et Roberto
de Caldstrem cleric:

et multis ali

CONFIRMACIO ECCLESIE DE LAYNAL ET DE QWITCESTYR,

26. Comes Waldeuus omnibus probis hominibus suis et amicis
et omnibus in Christo dilectis salutem.Notum sit omnibus pre-
sentibus pariter et futuris post datam a patre meo comite Cos-
esie de Llaynall sanctimonialibus
de Caldstrem quam ego concessi et hac mea carta pr

patricio dimidiam partem ec

senti

confirmani me integre dedisse et hac carta presenti confirmasse

. aliain dimidietatem ecclesie eciusdem de Laynal eisdem sancti-

monialibus de Caldstrem post decessum institute persone . Pre-
terea eisdem monialibus et presenti carta mea confirmo Wite-
chestve per rectas dinisas suas et communam in pasturis meiis
circumiacentibus quantum [ad] aueria sua propria et unam carn-
catam terre in territorio de Hei

ill. et ecclesiam eiusdem
-quas Derder Comitissa
s dedit . et Cospatricius comes pater meus carta sua

ville cum omnibus pertinencijs sui

mater mea ©
confirmauit . et totam terram quam Normannus filius Edulfi dedit
illis in Laynall per rectas div

suas concedo et confirmo pro
Dei amore et salute anime mee et ommium antecessornm et
successorum meorum in liberam et perpetuam elimosinam ita

libere et quiete in perpetuum possidendas sicut aliqua elimosina
in regno Scocie liberius et quiecius tenetur et possidetur
Hiis testibus abbate Nicolaio de Striuellin . et priore Radulfo .
Patricio fratre comitis. R. de Merley. Patricio filio Adgary .




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTR 19

Adam de Edynton . Henrico clerico nepote abbatis de Striuellin.
et aliis .

CARTA QUIETE CLAMACIONES CUIUSDEM TERRE DE QWITCITESTYR.

27. Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis et fidelibus ad quos
presens scriptum peruenerit Dauid Marescallus Salutem . Nouerit
uniuersitas vestra quod conuersia (sie) que sit inter me et conuen-
tum sancti monialium cde Caldstrem de terra jacente inter Witches-
tyr et Otyrburn talem acepit finem sciliect quod ego et heredes
mei predictam terram predictis monialibus quietum clamanimus
ab illo [loco] ubi Heselihow cadit in Dvi uersus montem usque ad
ebulli
mnoram ysque ad capud petarii versus aquilonem ita quod nec ego

jonem Rinuli de Heselihow et deinde transuersantem

nee heredes mei ullum rectum yltra hos predictos limites clam-
abimus. Vt autem hee conuencio et contirmacio firma et inper-
petuum inconcussa permaneat sigilli mei apposicione eam coro-
boraui. Hiis testibus . Nesio de Waltun . Ricardo Namo. Roberto
de Hupsetlintun . Rogero de Llacrei. Johanne Mavreseallo .
Rogerus (sie) filius H.. Alexandro de Hersill . et multis aliis

LLITTERA CUIUSDEM TERRE DE QWITCHETYR DE QUIETA
[CLAMACIONE].

28. Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis et fidelibus ad
quos presens scriptum peruenerit Henricus filius Cunani salutem
Nouerit vniuersitas vestra quod conuersia (sic) que fuit inter me
et connentum sanctimonialinm de Caldstrem de terra je
inter Witcestyr et Otyrburn talem finem acepit . Scilicet quod
nec ego et heredes mei predictam terram predictam terram (sic)
predictis monialibus quietum clamabimus ab illo loco vbi Heselic-
lov cadit in Dyi versus montem vsque ad ebullicionem Riuuli
de He

petarii versus aquilonem ita quod nee ego nec heredes mei

eliclov et deinde transnersantem moram vsque ad capud

vilum rectum vltra hos predictos limites clamabimus. Ut

Fol. 21

Fol.




20 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

autem hee connencio et hee confirmacio firma et inperpetuum
inconcussa permaneat Sigilli mei apposicione eam coroboraui .
Hiis testibus Nesio de Waltun . Ricardo Namo. Roberto de Hup-
selintun .Rogero de Lacrei. Johanne Marescallo. Rogero filio
Henrici. Alexandro de Hersill . et multis aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS TERRE QUE DICITUR SELBURLECHE
WHIELI[OPE.

29. Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis et fidelibus has
litteras visuvis vel audituris Patricius filins comitis Patricii de
Dunbar salutem in Domino . Nouerit uninersitas vestra me
divine pictatis intuitu concessi

firma

se et hac presenti carta mea con-
Deo et ecclesie beate Marie de Caldstrem et sancti-
monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus totam terram de Selburleche
quam Alanus filius Thome habuit per easdem rectas diuisas et
quas dictus Alanns eandem terram tenuit et possedit ex dono
patris mei. Et in angmentun illius terre concedo et confirmo
eiis totam pastwram a capite de Whiclhope extra siluam
extransuerso vsque ad vallem descendentem inter Ffarniley et
Strikesley descendentem in Riuulum de Crumbesyde et sie per
illum Riuulum ascendendo inter Crumbessyde et Sengedowa
. vsque ad diuisas inter dominum comitem patrem [meum] et
Willelmum de Vepunt Tenendam eiis de domino patre meo et
heredibus suis in pwram et perpetuam elim
quiete et honorifice

inam ita libere
icut carta domini patris [mei] protes-
tatur et proportat Hiis testibus Domino Willelmo fratre meo .
Bernardo Ferser . Adam de Pollevrech . Rogero de Merlay. T. de
Gordun . Johanne de Lethame . Johamne filio Waldeui. Willelmo
de Boltevy . et multis aliis .

CONFIRMACIO CARTE PRECEDENTIS.

30. Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesic filiis et fidelibus has lit-
teras visuris vel audituris Patricius filius Domini Comitis de Dun-



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 21

salutem in Domino. Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me concessh

et hac presenti carta mea confirmasse Deo et ecclesie beate Marie

de Caldstrem et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus totam
terram de Selbukleche quam Alanus filius Thome militis habuit
per easdem rectas diuisas per quas dictus Alanus eandem terram
tenuit et possedit ex dono patris mei. Et in augmentum illins
terre concedo et confirmo eijs totam pasturam a eapite de

Wlweshope extra siluam extransuerso vsque ad vallem descend-

entem inter Fermley et Strikesley descendentem in rinulum de
Crumbesyde et sie per illum rivulum ascendendo inter Crum-
besyde et Seugidewed vsque ad dinisas inter dominum comitem pot, 24.
patrem mewn et Willelmum de Vepund.Tenendain eiis de con-
firmacione mei et heredum meorum in liberam puram et per-
petuam elimosinam ita libere quiete plenarie et honoritice
sicut aliqna alia elimosina liberius quiecius et honorificencins
tenetur et possidetur infra regnum Scocie et ita quod nulli
homini licebit infra predicta
sine licencia predictarum monialium aliquam habere communem

diuisas cum animalibus suis

sicut carta patris mei domini comitis protestatur et proportat
Vt autem hee mea confirmacio futuris temporibus firma et
stabilis perseueret sigilli mei munimine roboraui Hiis (sie) Domino
meo Comite Patricio. Willelmo fratre meo.Bernardo Ferser.
Adam de Powwurd. Rogero de Merley. Thoma de Gordun .
Johanne filio Waldeui . Johanne de Letham . Willelmo de Labarre .
Hugone forestario de Duns. et multis aliis .

Incipiunt Carte Terra

wn de Dereestyr.
CARTA DE VNO TOFTO ET DE VNA RODA TERRE IN DERCESTYR.

31, Omnibus Christi fidelibus hoe scriptum visuris  vell
audituris Ricardus filius Hugonis coci de Dercestria eternam in
Domino salutem Nouerit vniue
cessisse et hac carta mea presenti confirmasse Deo et ecclesic
Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruienti-

itas vestra me dedisse con- Fol.




cAK

MONIALIUM DE CALDSTR

bus et inperpetuum seruituris vam toftuin in villa de Dercestria
cum vna roda terre dicto tofto adiacente inperpetuum Reddendo
erdicio con-

inde annuatim mihi vel heredibus me
suetudine et demanda seculari vnam libram cwnini vel tres
olulos ad nundinas de Rokeshurgh . Ego nero Ricardus et heredes
meii dictum toftum cum suis pertinencijs dictis monialibus
contra omnes homines et feminas inperpetuum warandizabimus

pro omni

defendemmus et acquietabimus In cuius rei testimoninm presenti
scripto sigium meum apposui hiis testibus. Waltero de Der-
cestria. Waltero firmario Domini Comitis de Hersill . Dominis
Henrico. Rogero. et Johanne. tune temporis capellanis de Cald-
strem. et multis aliis.

CARTA CUIUSDEM TERRE IN VILLA DE DERCESTY.

32. Omnibus hoe seriptum Alanus filius Thome filii Elene
Salutem in Domino . Noverit vninersitas vestra me diuine pie-
intuitu et pro salute anime mee dedisse concessisse et hac
e Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de

tatis
presenti carta mea confirm:
Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et inperpetunm
seruituris Vnam acram terre et dimidiam in occidentali parte
crofti mei cum tofte ad dictam terram coniunctis et tres acras
terre in cultura que vocatur Spitelilat in territorio de Dercestyr
cum omnibus suis pertinenciis libertatibus et asyamentis ad
dictam [terram] pertinentibus vel pertinere valentibus tam infra
villam de Dereestyr quam extra sine aliquo retenemento. in

liberam puram et perpetuam climosinam inperpetuwn Tenen-
dam et habendam dict
libere quiete plene bene et in pace sient aliqua elimosina infra
comitatum de Dunbar liberius quiecius plenius et honorificentius
Zgo vero Alanns et heredes mei

monialilus de me et heredibus [uw

ab aliquo tenetur vel possidetur.
dictam terram cum toftis eroftis et eum suis pertinencijs eum
omnibus supradictis predictis monialibus contra omnes homines
warandizabimus acquietabimus et inperpetiwm defendemus.

In cuius rei testimonium presenti sigillam meum apposui hiis



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 25

stibus Waltero filio mi . Thoma filio cius, Alanus de Ed-
mersdun . Patricio de Gray senescallo, Adam Tunoc. Johanne de
Tossanir. et multis aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM TERRE DE DER
ALANO FILIO

ESTYR CUID

33. Sciant tam presentes quam future quod ego Alanus filins
Thome de Dercestyr dedi et concessi et presenti carta mea con-
firmani Domino Waltero capellano filio Walteri filio (sée) Swardy Fol.
wnam acram terre in villa de Dercestyr jacentem inxta viam
que vocatur Cakewellegat ex parte orientali cum omnibus pertin-
encijs et aysiamentis et libertatibus suis tam infra villa quam
extra sine aliquo retenemento Tenendam et habendam cum
omnibus pertinencijs suis predicto Domino Waltero ct heredi-
lihere
¢ in omnibus Reddendo inde

bus suis vel suis assignatis de me et heredibus me

quiete plene pacifice et honori

annuatim mihi et heredibus meiis tummodo vnum denarium
vel ynum par cirotheearum ad festum Sancti Jacobi apostoli
nomine feode firme pro omni seruicio consuetudine exaccione
seculari et demanda que de dicta acra terre aliquo modo exigi
poterunt Ego nero Alanus et heredes mei dictam acram terre
cum omnibus pertinenciis et libertatibus suis predicto Domino
Waltero et heredibus suis vel su
homines et feminas warandizabimus et defendemus in perpetuum
Vt autem hee mea donacio conce:

assignatis contra omnes

» et presentis carte con-
firmacio rata et stabilis permaneat sigillum meum huic carte
zio filio, Walteri . Domino
Johanne Gray tune senescallo Domini 2. Comitis. Waltero de

est appenstun hiis  testibus . Patri

Dereestyr. Alano de Edinerisden . Andrea seruiente . eb aliis. vol. 2s.

CARTA TOFTI

STYR PER

CROFL (sie) DATA IN VILLA DE DERC
QUEMDAM W. CAPILLANUM.

34. Sciant omnes tam presentes quam futuri quod ego Walterus



Fol.

24 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

capellanus dedi concessi et hac carta confirmaui Deo et ecclesie
Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo
sernientibus et inperpetuum seruituris vnum toftum et croftum
infra villam de Dercestria ex parte orientali vie que vocatur
Cakewellegat ad vnam petanciam faciendam dictis monialibus in
crastino Sancti Laurencii martiris pro anima Matilde matris mee
et pro salute anime mee et antecessorum et successorum meorum

in liberam puram et perpetuam elimosina cum communi pastura
ville de Dercestyr et omnibus alijs communibus asyamentis ad
dictos toftum et corftum (sic) infra villam et extra pertinentibus
Dedi eciam eiisdem monialibus ex consensu et voluntate Walteri
filii Swardy patris mei vnam acram terre et dimediam jacentes
super Coteflatte ex parte orientali terre ad frece (?) in puram et
perpetuam elimosinam . Tenendas et habendas dictis monialibus
de me et heredibus meijs adeo libere quiete bene et honorifice

. sicut aliqua climosina liberius quiecius et honorificencius infra

comitatum de Dunbar ab aliquo tenetur vel possedetur. Ego
uero Walterus et heredes mei dictos toftum et croftum et dictam
acram terre et dimediam cum omnibus supradictis et per-
tinenciis suis dictis monialibus contra omnes homines et feminas
warantizabimus acquietabimus et inperpetumm defendemus Vt
hee mea donacio concessio et carte mee confirmacio rata et
stabilis

permaneat huie carte mee sigillum mewn est appensum
testibus . Domino Patricio filio Domini P. Comitis de Dunbar.
Domino Patricio filio Walteri. Domino Johanne de Letham .
Waltero filio militis . Andrea seruiente . et aliis .

Ineipiunt Curte Terre de Thornidich,
CARTA DONACIONIS COMMUNIS PASTURE.

35. Onmibus Sancte Matris Ecelesie filiis et fidelibns ad quos
presens scriptum peruenerit Willelmus filius Patricii de Hersill
salutem Nouerit vuiuersitas vestra me concessisse et hac pre-
senti carta confirmasse Deo et Sancte Marie et conuentui de
Caldstrem ibidem Deo et Sancte Marie seruienti totam com-



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSIREM

munem pasturain de Thornidiche ad x1 equas et earum sequelas
donec earum sequele ad etatem trium annorum peruenerint et ad
cctoginta animalia et ad octoginta porcos et ad ducentas
oves . Ita quod oues preter predictam pasturam gaudebunt
communi aisiamento et pastura de Gordun quatenus attingere
autem predicta animalia vel  porci terminos
predicte pasture de Thornidiche versus pasturam de Gordun

possunt . §

forte excisserint inde nulla exaccio exigetur . Optentu autem
predictorum porcorum omnium in terra sua nullum stachium
faciet predictus conuentus Predictam uero pasturam et asia-
mentum predicto conuentui vt premissum est confirmaui pro
salute anime mee et omnium antec
meorum tenendam et possidendam inperpetuum de me et

orum et successorum

heredibus meijs in puram et perpetuam et liberam elimo-
sinam libere quiete pacifice plenarie ct honorifice ab omne
exaccione et demanda et seculari seruicio sicut carta Thome de
Gordun confirmat et testatur et sicut aliqua elimosina libe
plenius et quiecius in toto reguo Scocie tenetur et possidetur .
Hiis testibus. Domino Comite P. Patricio filio eius . I. archi-
diacono de Dunkelden.J. de Letham. W. de Hetun. Adam de
Gordun . Adam de Fannes . Adam clerico . et invitis altis.

us

ALIA CARTA DE THORNIDYK.

36, Omnibus

Sancte Matris Ecclesie filijs et fidelibus ad quos
presens seriptuin peruenerit . Thomas de Gordun salutem .
Nouerit vniuersitas vestra ine dedisse concessisse et hac pre-
sente carta mea confirmasse Deo et Sancte Marie et conuentni
de Caldstrem ibidem Deo et Sancte Marie seruienti totam com-
munem pasturam [de Thornidich] ad quatraginta equas et
earum sequelas donet earuin sequele ad etatem trium annorum
peruenerint et ad octoginta animalia et ad octoginta porcos et
ad ducentas oues Ita quod oues preter predictam pasturam de
Thornidiche gaudebunt communi pastura et aisyamento de

Gordun quatenus attingere possunt Si autem predicta animalia

Fol. 30.

Pol. 31.



Fol. 32.

Fol. 33.

26 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTRI

vel porci terminos predicte pasture de Thornidyk versus
pasturam de Gordun forte excesserint inde nulla exaccio

exigetur. Optentu autem predictorum animalium porcorum et
ouium in terra sua nullum stachium facict predictus conuentus
predictam uero pasturam et aisiamentwn predicto conuentui vt
premissum est confirmani pro salute anime mee et omninm
antecessorum et successorum meorum Tenendam scilicet et pos-

sidendam inperpetuum de me et heredibus

meijs in puram et
perpetuam et liberam elimosinam lib

e et quiete pacifice et

plenarie et honorifice ab omni exaccione demanda et sernicio

seculari sicut aliqua elimosina liberius plenins et quiecius in toto

regno regis Scocie tenetur et possidetur hiis testibus . Domino
Comite P.. Patricio filio eins. Willelmo Patrici. Rogero Malo
lupulo. H. archidiacono de Dunkelden. Johanne de Letham . et

aliis .

CONFIRMACIO COMMU:

S PASTURE IN THORNIDICH EY IN GORDUN,

37. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vell
andituris Thomas de Gordun filins Domini Thome de CGordun
inilitis salutem Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me concessisse et confir-

inasse Deo et eeclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus

ibidem Deo et Sancte Marie seruientibus totam donacionem quam

eiisdem monialibus fecit pater mens Videlicet in terri
libertate multwre et omnibus alijs ay:
de Thornidiche et de Gordun prout melius et pleniu

pratis
iamentis villarmm

in carta

patris mei continetur exceptis octoginta porcis pro quibus dedi
et concessi et confirmani dictis monialibus escambium dictorum
porcortm communem pasturam tam in Thornidiche quam in
Gordum centum ouibus cum dneentis ouibus prenominatis

inta aue

et vigenti ane in communi pas
tura de Thornidich in carta patris mei prenominatis Dedi eciam
et confirmaui ad incrementum donacionis patris me:
pro salute anime mee et uxo
mee et omnium antecessorum et successorum meorum dictis

s cum alijs octog

mee et patris mei et matris



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 27

monialibus terram illam que jacet inter fossatum exitus ville

et terram a patre meo prius eiisdem collatum in liberam
puram et perpetuam elimosinam Volo autem vt dicte moniales
eandem terram teneant et possideant cum omnibus alijs liber-
tatibus in carta patris mei prenominatis adeo libere quicte
plenarie et honorifice Sicut aliquam elimosinam liberius quiecius
et plenius in toto regno Scocie teneant et possedent . Hiis testibus
Patricio filio Domini Patricii Comit

Domino meo. Domino
Willelmo fratre comitis. Domino Ricardo Mantelent . Roberto
de Hetley.Alano de Hertishede. Roberto de Letham . Waltero

capellano de Caldstrem . et multis aliis .

CARTA CONFIRMACIONIS CARTE ANTEDICTE DE TERRA DE THORNYDIK,

38. Omnibus Chr
anditw
Noucrit vninersitas vestra me dinine pietatis intuitu cone

ti fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel

Tomas de Gordun filius Thome de Gordun salutem.

se
et confirmasse Deo ct ecelesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et
sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo et Sanete Marie seruientibus
totam donacionem quam eiisdem monialibus feeit pater meus
videlicet in terris pratis pasturis et omnibus aisyamentis ville de
Thornidich
et confirmani dictis monialibus in eseambium dictorum porcorum

ptis octoginta poreis pro quibus dedi et concessi

pasturam centum ouibus cum dueentis ouibus prenominatis
in carta patris vbique in territorio de Thornidich et viginti
aueriis ewm alijs octoginta aueriis similiter in carta patris mei
prenominatis Habebunt autem dicte moniales plenariam pas-

Vol. 34.

turam in territorio de Thornidich ad quatraginta equas et ad Fol. 35.

earum sequelas donet earum sequele ad etatem trimn annormn
peruenerint Ita scilieet quod Dominus fundi nee aliquis alius
defensum alienbi in territorio de Thornidich facere poterit in quo
tam dicte eque quam earum sequele et prenominata aueria cum
acione et contra-

trecentis predictis ouibus libere sine aliqua ve
dictione ire non possint, Gaudebunt autem dicte oues preter
pasturam de Thornidich communi pastura de Thornidich com-




Fol. 36,

28 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

muni pastura ville mee de Gordun et aisiamento vbique extra
bladum et pratum Si autem predicta animalia terminos predicte
pasture de Thof[r]nidich versus pasturam de Gordun forte ex-
cesserint inde unlla inprecacio vel exaccio fiet Dedi eciam con-
mei pro
ute anime mee et omnium antecessormm et successornm

cessi et confirmani ad incrementum donacionis patri

meortm dictis monialibus terram illam inter fossatum exitus

ville eiusdem de Thornidich in orientali parte et terram a patre
[meo] eiisdem monialibus prius collatam in liberam puram et
perpetuam climosinam Volo autem ut dicte moniales hane terram
cum alijs terris et ceteris in carta patris mei prenominatis

hahee sideant cum omnibus libertatibus et.

nt teneant et po

aisiamentis ville mee de Thornidich adeo libere et quiete

plenayi

» et honorifice siewt aliqua elimosina liberius plenius et

quiecius alicubi in toto regno Scocie tenetur et possidetur Si
uero predicte moniales ibidem habuerint homines maneutes vel
predictas terras ad firmam dederint eos qui eas habuerint vel
tenuerit vtentur communilus aisiamentis dicte ville de Thorni-
dich tam in pasturis et in focalibus quam libertatibus molendini
videlicet ut tam homines dicti quam predicte moniales molent
Dladum quod coluerunt vel habuerunt ex dono patris mei et
mei in territorio de Thornidich ad molendinum meum omnino
sine multura’si eas ibi placuerit molere ita quod moletur statim
post illud quod fuerit supra trimodium omni tempore inper-
petuum nisi fuerit bladum meum dominicum vel ducent bladum
melius placuerit . Hiis  testibus
Patricio filio Domini Comitis Domino meo. Domino Willelmo
fratre Comitis. Domini R. Mautelent. Domino Willelmo de
Veteriponte juniore. Domino Alano de Harkarres . Domino
Thoma Grim. Roberto de Letham. Waltero eapellano de Cald-
strem . et multis aliis .

suum alias vbicunque eijs

TreEM (/) CARTA HEG CUM CARTA PRECEDENTE.

39. Oumibus Sancte Matris Ecclesie filijs et fidelibus ad quos



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 29

presens scriptum pernenerit Thomas de Gordun salutem Nouerit
uniuers

itas vestra me dedisse et concessisse et hac presente carta
mea confirmasse Deo et Sancte \
ibidem Deo et Sancte Marie seruienti totam communem pas-

arie de Caldstrem et conuentui

turam de Thornidich ad quatraginta eqnas et earum sectam
quovsque triuin annorum etatem compleuerint pro salute anime
mee et omnium antecessorum et successorum Tenendam scilicet
et possidendam inperpetuum de me et heredibus meijs in puram
liberam et perpetuam elimosinam libere et quiete pacifice plenarie
ecione et consuetudine et demanda et
sernicio seculari sient aliqua climosina liberius plenius et

et honorifice ab omni exa

quiecius in toto regno Domini regis Scocie tenetur et possidetur .
Hiis testibus Domino Patricio comite . Patricio filio eins . Johanne
de Letham . Willelmo de Hettun . Adam de Gordun , Ad. filio
eius . Willelmo de Ffaunes . et multis aliis.

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM [TERRE] QUE DATATUR AD ILOPI-
TANDUM ANIMALIA DE CALD, IN TIOR.

40. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens  scriptum
peruenerit Thomas de Gordun salutem. Sciatis me dedisse et
concess

isse et hac presenti carta mea confirmasse Deo et eccl

eC
Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et conuentui ibidem Deo et Sancte

Marie sernienti vnum ioftum quod Reginaldus Cementarius

tenuit et quatuor acras terre adiacentes cum eodem tofto men-

suratas in villa mea de Thornidich ad receptandas et hospitandas
aneria sua que in alia carta mea sunt prenominata quam de me
habent . Et preterea quatuor acras prati mensuratas in prato que
vocatur Lene dimedij.Tenendas scilicet inperpetunm de me et
heredibus meijs in puram et perpetuam elimosinam . Adeo libere
quiete pacifice plenarie et honorifice ab omni consuetudine et

exaccione et demanda et servicio seculari sicut aliqua elimosina
in toto regno Regis Scocie liberius quiecius plenarius et honori-
ficencins tenetur et possidetur Hiis testibus . Ricardo Abbate de

Kellkw . Symon monacho. Rogero de Merley . Edwardo de

Fol. 87.

Fol. 38,



Pol. 89.

30 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

Wallibus. Adam de Gordun. Andrea capellano. Waltero eapel-
Jano. Alexandro de Hersill . Alano senescaldo . Ranulfo de Hayl-
tun . et multis alti

CARTA DONACIONIS CUICSDEM PRATI QUOD VOCATUR CAMMES-
MEDU IN VILLA DE BASTYNDEN.

41. Omnibus Sanete Matris Eeclesie filijs presentibus et
futuris has literas visuris vel audituris Thomas de Rauchburne

vestra me dinine pie-

in Domino salutem Nouerit [vniuersita:
tatis intuitu et pro salute anime mee et antecessorum et sueces-
sorum meorum dedisse concessisse et he
‘ie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem
Deo seruientibus et inperpetuum sernituris illid pratum quod

» presenti carta me con-

firmasse Deo et Sancte Ma
vocatuy Cammesmedn quod iacet in territorio de Thornidich cum
suis justis pertinencijs per suas rectas diuisas sine aliqua
diminucione retencione vel subtraccione Tenendum et habendum
dictis monialibus de me et heredibus meiis in liberan puram et
perpetnam
aliqua elimosina alicubi in toto regno Scocie liberi

mosinam adeo libere et quiete et honorifice sient

quiecius

plenarius et honorificencius et plenins tenetur et possidetur Ego
Thomas uero et heredes mei illud predictum pratum eum suis
justis pertinencij
abimus defendemus et acquietabimus Subieci insuper me et

contra onmes homines et feminas warandiz-

diecioni Archidiaconi Laudonie et Decani de
ine aliqua contradicci

heredes meos juri

Merse qui pro tempore fuerit qui nos

per senstwai eccleciasticam si necesse fuerit possunt conpellere
zandum quam ad defendendum dictam pratum
cmn suis pertinencijs quam ad satisfacienduim dictis monialibus

et jacturis ob

tam ad warandi

per visum virormn fidedignormm de iniur
defectum waranticie mee et heredwm meorum eiisdem moni-
alibus illatis . In enius rei testimonium presenti seripto
sigiltum meum apposui hiis testibus. Domino Hugone de
Gurlay tune temporis seneseallo Domini mei Comitis . Domino
Patricio filio Walteri. Domino Roberto de Nesbit . Domino




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

Roherto de Polwort . Roberto de Pinkerton. Waltero de Dev-
cestyr. et multis alii

CONFIRMACIO CARTE PRECEDENTIS,

42. Omnibus
futuris has litteras visuris vell audituris Thomas de Rawchburn

Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis presentibus et

filius et heres Willelmi de Rawehburne in Domino salutem
Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me dinine pietatis intuitu et pro

salute anime mee et antecessorum et suc

dedisse concessis e Deo

et hae presente carta mea confirma
et Sanete Marie de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo ser-
wientibus illud pratum quod voeatur Cammesmedu quod jacet in
erritorio ville de Thornidich eum suis iustis pertinenciis per

suas rectas diuisas sine aliyuo retencione subtraccione [vel]
diminucione Tenendum et habendum dictis monialibus de me
et heredibus [mei
adeo libere et quiete plenarie et honori
alicubi in toto regno Scocie liberius quieeius et honorificencius
tenetur et possidetur Ego uero Thomas et heredes mei illud
predictum pratum cum suis
alilbus contra omnes homines et feminas warandizabimus de-

in liberain puram et perpetuam elimosinam

ice siewt aliqua elimosina

justis pertinenciis predictis moni-
fendemus et acquietabimus Subieci me insuper jurisdiecione
Archidiaconi Laudonie et Decani de Mersches qui pro tempore
fuerit qui nos sine aliqua contradiccione per censuram ecclesi-
asticam si necesse fuerit conpellere possint tam ad warandiz-
andum quam ad defendendum dictum pratum cum suis per-
tenencijs quam ad satisfaciendum dictis monialibus per visum
virorum fidedignorum de iniuriis et jacturis ob defectum

warantie mei et heredum meorum dem monialibus iatis in

euius rei testimonium presentibus litteras sigillum meum
apposui hiis testibus Domine Hugone de Gurlay tune temporis
senescallo domini mei Comitis. Domino Patricio filio Walteri .

Domino Roberto de Nesbit .cum multis alijs in carta nominat

rtm ~meorum F



Fol. 41.

32 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

Tneipiunt Carte de Bastynden.
CARTA DE QUADAM TERRA DATA ECCLESIE DE BASTYNDEN,

43. Omnibus Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis Willelmus de Mahle
de Bastyndane salutem . Sciat vniuersitas vestra me dedisse et
concessisse et hac presente carta mea confirmasse Deo et ecclesie
Sancte Marie de Bastynden . xv acras terre quarum xi acre jacent
in campo de Bakestanesden ct quatuor acre apud Harelaw et
totum pratumn ad Strotherflat et vnam acram prati ad Hunpul et
illud toftum et croftum et duas acras terre quas Adam panper
clericns aliquando tenuit et preterea duas acras terre que jacent
apud Tfeuedes quas videlicet acras Robertus de Mahle nepos

meus (edit Deo et sancte predicte matri ecclesie de Bakestane-
den cum omnibus libertatibus et aysiamentis predicte ville per-

et matris mee ct omnium

tinentibus pro animabus patris [me’
autecessorum et successorum meornm in puram et perpetuam
elimosinam Sicut aliqna elimosina liberius vell melius dari
potest . Hiis testibus Magistro Warino de Soltre . et Johanne tune
Decano de Ffogo. Magistro Adam de Hersill . Patricio de Home .
Thoma de Copland. Alano de Edrede. Ranulfo de Haltun. et

aliis .

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM TERRE IN BASTYNDEN,

44. Omnibus Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis has litteras visuris
vel audituris Robertus de Maille salutem Noscat vuinersitas

isse et hac

vestra me concessu heredum meorwn dedisse cone

2. mea presenti carta confirmasse Deo et Sancte Marie de Caldstrem

et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus vij acras terre in
campo de Bastynden ewn pertinencijs in hii
quatuor acras inter Fahelane et moram et quatuor acras ad

videlicet locis

capita croftorum in puram et perpctuam elimosinam pro anima-
bus patris mei et matris mee et antecessorum et successorum

meorum tam integre et plenarie lihere quiete et honorifice sicut



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. :

aliqua elimosina liberius et melius dari potest. Hiis  testibus .
Waltero de Halyburton. Adam de Gordun. Hutredo filio Berolfy.
Willelmo Belle . Waltero filio Hugonis . Edolf filio Galfridi .
Galfrido filio Gerardy . et multis alii:

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM TERRE DE BASTYNDEN,

45. Notum sit omnibus hominibus presentibus et futuris
hane cartam visnris vell audituris quod ego Willelmus de
Muhile dedi concessi et hac mea presenti carta contirmaui Deo
et Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo
seruientibus illud toftum et croftum in villa de Bastynden quod
Orm frater Hutredi eiusdem ville capellani aliquando de me tenuit
et duas acras terre unam apud Kukellat et alteram juxta Harelaw
super Watlandis cum pertinencijs in puram et perpetuam elimo-
sinam pro animabus comitis Waldeui et eins comitisse et patris
et matris mee et omnium antecessorum et suecessorum meornm
cum omnibus aisyamentis et libertatibus predicte ville pertinen-
tibus Tam libere quiete et honorifice sicut aliqua elimosina
liberius vel melius dari potest Testibus . Johanne tune decano de
Fogo. Magistro Adam de Hersill . Hutredo capellano de Bastyn-
den. Ricardo de Fahenes. Waltero de Halyburtun , Ranulfo de
Halyhtun. et multis ali

ALIA CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM TERRE IN BASTYNDEN,

46, Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum peruen-
erit Robertus de May] nepos Gauini de May] eternam in Domino
salutem Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me cum consensu et assensu
heredum meorum in tempore pacis dedisse concessisse et hac
mea presenti carta confirmasse domui de Caldstrem et monialibus
ibidem Deo seruientibus in puram et perpetuam elimosinam pro
salute anime mee et antecessorum et successorum meorum
totam terram meam de Bastynden. Scilicet terram adiacentem

inter capellam et domum meam et preterea terram illam que
Cc

Fol. 43,



Pol. 44.

Sb CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM,

yocatur Faulanche ct pratum juxta eandem terram libere quiete
et honorifice ab omni consnetudine et exaccione saluo jure
Domini mei secundum tenorem carte mee et secnndwn contir-
macionem Domini. P. Comitis de Dunbar cum omnibus as

mentis predicte ville adiacentibus In huius autem rei testimonium
ad maiorem securitatem et peticionem meam. Dominus R. Dei
gracia abbas de Calcoy . et decanus de Mersches. sigilla sua appo-
suerunt . Hiis testibus Domino Patricio et Willelno et Roberto
de Museum. Andree et Willelmo capellanis. P. de Os
Alexandro Marealdy . et multis aliis .

yntun .

CARTA QUIETE CLAMATIONIS TERRE DICTE,

47. Omnibus hoe seriptam visuris vel andituris Rogerus filius
Willelmi de Bastynden. Alicia vxor eius salutem in Domino
sempiternam . Nouerit nos pro nobis et heredibus nostris totum
jus nostri quod pro nobis clamauimus habere de seruicio et
secta cnrie et omnibus aliis demandis de priorissa et conuentu de
Caldstrem vel corum assignatis quietum clamasse in territorio

de Bastynden et penitus confirmasse adeo libere quiete sicut
aliqua elimosina vel terra in regno Seocie possit liberius vel
quiecius dari secundum cartarnm suarwm tenorem ct si de certo
contingat quod defectus aliquis in eartis diete domus de Cald-
strem jnueniatur alicuius contraneniens de dicta terra sient
prius totaliter quietum clamauimus In cuius rei testimonium
sigillum meum yna cum sigillo Alicie vxoris mee huic scripto est

appensum .

CARTA DONACIONIS ANNUI REDITUS IN VILLA DE BERWYK IN VIA
[Qua] DICITUR VDDINGGATE.

48. Omnibus Sancte Matris Ecclesie filijs presentibus et futuris
presens scriptum visuvis vel audituris . W. batillarius Burgensis
de Bereunic salutem in Domino. Nonerit vninersitas vestra me
divine pietatis intuitn et pro salute anime et antecessorum et



CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 35

successorum meorum dedisse concessisse et hac presenti carta
mea confirmasse Deo ecclesie beate Marie de Caldstrem et sancti-
nonialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et inperpetium seruituri
in puram et perpetuam elimosinam quemdam annuum reditum
viginti solidoram percipiendum annuatim de quadam terra jacente

in Vddinggate in villa de Bereunic inter terram Symonis Fline

ex parte vna et terram Villelmi aurifabri quam tenet de Abbate Fol. 45
et connentu de Caleoy ex parte altera ad duos anni terminos
Videlicet decem solidos ad Pentecostem et decem solidos ad
festum Sancti Martini in hyeme.Tenendum et habendum dictis
monialibus de me et heredibus meijs libere quiete plene pacifice

et honorifice inperpetunm. Ego vero Willelmus et heredes mei
predictum annuum reditum viginti solidorum predictis sancti-
monialibus de Caldstrem contra omnes homines et feminas war-
andizabimus acquietabimus et defendemus inperpetuum . In
cuius rei testimonium presenti scripto sigillum meum apposui.
Testibus Domino Matheo de Grenelan tunc maiore de Berunic.
Thoma de Berham . Johanne Oliver . cum alijs in carta
expressis .

CARTA CUIUSDEM TERRE IN VILLA DE BEREWYK.

49. Omnibus hoe scriptum visuris [vel andituris] Rogerus
Nwys burgensis de Berwyk salutem in Domino sempiternam
Noueritis me dedisse concessisse et hae presenti carta mea con-
firmasse Deo et beate Marie et priorisse et conuentui de Cald-
strem in puram et perpetuam elimosinam pro anima mea et
animabus antecessorum meorum totaliter et sine aliquo retene-
mento illam terram in Corsgate infra villam de Berewyk quam
quidem terram legaliter emi ex propriis perquisitis meijs sicut
se extendit in longitudine et in latum inter terram Osberti Dute
ex una parte et terram Mergrete Bernham ex altera Tenen-
dam et habendam dicte domu: de Caldstrem et monialibus
ibidem seruientibus Deo liber: et quiete cum omnibus per-
tinencijs sicut liberum burcagium domini regis Reddendo inde Fol. 46,




Fol. 47,

36 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

suetudinem

annuatim domino regi denarios secundum con
Dburgi proomnibus que [de] dicta terra in posterum exigi poterunt .
In cuius rei testimonium presenti scripto sigillum mewn ap-
stibus Domino Simone Maunsel . Roberto de Bernham .

posni
Adam filio Philippi. Rogero de Eboraco. Roberto de Tidale.
ymone de Hoga. Arnaldo Auyn . Thoma de Sellario . et alij

CARTA CUIUSDEM ANNUI REDITUS IN BEREWYK.

50, Uniuersis Sancte Matris Ecclesie filijs presens scriptum
visuris vell audituris Robertus de Bernham Rector ecclesie de
Tyningame salutem in Domino Nouerit vniner vestra
ine diuine pietatis intuitu concessisse et hac presenti carta mea
confirmasse domui de Caldstrem et sanctimonialibus ibidem Deo
seruientibus vnam marcam annui redditns in pnram et perpetiam

elimosinam percipiendam de Rogero filio Martini textoris et

heredibus suis vel suis assignatis annuatim pro quadam terra
quam predictus Rogerus de me tenet ad feodam firmam que jacet
infra villam de Beruwyk in Crosgate inter terram Arturi ex
parte vna et terram Johannis Gray ex altera soluendam ad duos
anni terminos videlicet medietatem ad Pasca et aliam medieta-
tem ad festum Sancti Micaelis. Ego uero Robertus et heredes
mei predictam marcam annui reditus sanctimonialibus predicte
domus contra omnes homines et feminas warandizabimus de-
fendemus et acquietabimus. Vt hee mea donacio et presentis
carte mee confirmacio perpetunm robor firmitatis optineat pre-
sens scriptum sigilli mei munine (sic) roboraui . Hiis testibus
Domino Matheo de Grenlau tunc maiore de Bernwyk . Dominis
Warino de Wyteby. Adam filio Philippi. Thoma de Bernham
Johanne Oliver. tunc prepositis et alijs.

CARTA DONACIONIS TERRE IN BEREUUIC.

51. Sciant omnes tam pres ptes quam futuri quod ego
Willelinus de Salle dedi concessi et hac presenti carta confirmaui




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM, oT

Deo et Saucte Marie de Caldstrem ct monialibus ibidem Deo et
Sanecte Marie sernientibus pro salute anime mee et antec:
et successorum meornm et pro participacione omnium benefici-
orum totam illam terram que jacet inter domum meam lapidiam
et domuin Jordani generis mei cum omnibus messuagiis et alijs

ori

rebus ad predictam terram pertinentibus habendam de me et
leredibus in puram ct perpetuam elimosinam libere quiete et

solute ab omni calumpna et seruicio s
Regem pertinet scilicet vj denari
Willelmus de Salle et heredes mei predictam terram contra omnes

duo hoe quod ad Dominum

Et sciendwm est quod ego

homines et feminas warandizabimus . Hijs testibus Willelmo de
Bernam . W. Nigro. Ro. de Benam . Johanne eius fratre . Magistro
Willelmo de Soltre. Bartholomeo preposito de Hedinburehe .
Willelmo filio eins. Petro capellano. Philippo clerico . Rogero
Nutrice . et multis alijs .

CARTA DONACIONIS ANNUL REDITUS IN BEREWYK.

52. Omnibus hoe scriptum visuris vell audituris tam pre-
sentibus quam futuri
Beruwyk salutem eternam in Domino Nouerit vniuersitas

Johannes de Dunbar burgensis de

vestra me caritatis intuitu et pro salute anime mee et animarum
patris mei et matris mee et antecess
dedisse concessis

tun et successorum mcornm

e et hac presenti carta mea confirmasse domi
de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo et beate Marie sernienti-
bus et inposterum seruiendis in pam et perpetuam elimosinuam
viginti solidos argenti de quadam terra in vico sutorum annuatim
percipiendos in perpetuum de terra scilicet quam emi de Symone
Cnute quequidem terra jacet inter terram quondam Thome de
Notingame ex aquilonali parte et terram Willelni Anglici ex
australi parte Tenendos et habendos dicto domui de Caldstrem
et monialibus ibidem Deo et beate Marie servientibus in puram
et perpetuam elimosinam de me et heredibus meijs inper-
petuum . Et vt ista mea donacio et voluntaria concessio rata et
stabilis permaneat inposteram Ego Johannes presentem cartam

Fol. 48.



Fol. 49.

58 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

sigilo meo roboraui . Hiis testibus Domino Roberto de Bernham
tune maiore de Beruwyk. Roberto de Dunelm. Roberto Scoto.
Arnaldo Hauyn . Warino de Wyteby . Johanne de Hoe . Ste-
phano de Hoe. Petro de Dunbar. Johanne Chaunpunas . et multis

alijs.

CARTA DONACIONIS TERRE IN BANBURCHE.

53. Sciant omnes tam presentes quam futuri quod ego Thomas
i et
hac mea presenti carta confirmaui sanctimonialibus Sancte
Marie de Caldstrem vnam acram terre cum cultura mea de tofto
retro hospitalem de Banburch soli propinquiorem in puram et
perpetuam elimosinam pro animabus patris mei et inatris mee
et ommium antecessorum et successorum meorum in liberam
iam a theloneo et ab omni consuetudine et seculari

de Warndham concensu heredum meorum dedi et conce:

burga:
exaccione liberam solam et qu
et libertatibus predicte ville de Banburch pertinentibus intus
villam et extra villam tam libere et quiete et honorifice sicut

tam cum omnibus aisiamentis

aliqua elimosina liberius vel melius dari potest Ego uero pre-
dictus Thomas et heredes mei warandizabinus predictam
[terram] cum omnibus libertatibus prescriptis prenominatis
sanctimonialibus pure pro Dei amore contra omnes homines
Iliis testibus Johanne vicecomite . et Johanne filio eius . Rogero
filio Ranaldi. Alexandro de Bradforde.et Symone de Lu
Willelmo Biscop capellano de Banburch , et Willelmo Vuccester .
Adam de Musest (?) et multis alijs.

ee.

CARTA DONACIONIS MOLENDINI DE SEPLEY.

54. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel
audituris Ysouda filia Widonis vitrear
Nouerit vniuersitas vestra me in libero arbitrio meo et in
seculari habitu existentem concessisse dedisse et hac presenti
carta mea confirmasse Deo et beate Marie de Caldstrem et

de Almewych salutem




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTR

39
conuentui monialium et sororum ibidem Deo  seruiencium
pro animabus Widonis patris mei et Mariote matris mee
totum jus et clameum quod habui vel habere debui in illa
parte molendini de Sepley cum pertinencijs quam dictus
Johannes le Visconte de Stamforde . patri meo Widoni. et mihi
contulit per feodifirmam vnius denarii annuatim ipsi vel
heredibus suis de me et heredibus meijs vel assignatis meiis
aut ab assignatis eorum reddendi Habendam et tenendam ipsis
et successoribus suis inperpetuum adeo libere et integre in
omnibus sicut carta dicti Domini Johannis inde testatur Hiis
testibus . Magistro Alano de Len <Avrchidiacono Norumbrie .
Domino Waltero abbate de Alnen. Ebiorardo Teutonico.
Magistro Johanne forti. Waltero clerico constabularii de
Alnewych . Bartholomeo fratre meo. et mmultis alii

CARTA DONACIONIS CUIUSDEM REDITUS MOLENDINI DE PLE:

55. Omnibus hoc scriptum visuris vel audituris Johannes de
Plesseto salutem in Domino sempiternam Noueritis pro salute
anime mee et Elene quondam vxoris mee e
ce

omnium ante-

orum et heredum meorum dedisse conce

isse et presenti
seripto confirmasse pro me et heredibus meijs et assignatis
Deo et beate Marie et monialibus de Caldstrem in liberam
puram et perpetuam elimosinam x] solidos annni reditus de
molendino meo de Plesseto percipiendos ad Plessetum per earum
certum attornatum de me et heredibus mei,
annuatim ad duos terminos scilicet v

et meijs assignati:
iginti solidos ad An-
munciacionem beate Marie et xx solidos ad Natiuitatem beate
Marie Hune autem reditum assignaui specialiter in auxilium
ad uotam Johanne filie mee que ibi est monialis quamdiu
vixerit et post eius decessum remaneat ad vtilitatem dicte
domus inperpetuum Et si contingat quod aliquem terminum
solucio dicti reditus minus plene facta fuerit Ego Johannes et
heredes mei vel mei assignati respondebimus dictis monialibus
de omnibus expensis quas fecerint in perquirando quod a retro

Fol. 50.

Fol. 51.



40 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

fuerit credentes simplici verbo magistri domus vel  priorisse
sine alterius onere probacionis in eorum conciencia Ego Johannes
et heredes mei vel mei assignati predictum redditum dictis
monialibus warandizabimus et defendemus contra omnes
homines et feminas inperpetuum In enins rei testimonium pre-
senti seripto sigillum meum apposui. IIiis testibus . Domino
Adam tune abbate noui monasterij. Dominis Waltero et Stephano
tune rectoribus ecclesiarum de Staintun et de Mop. Domino
Tho. capellano de Schotton . Domino Gerardo de Wudrintun.
Johanne de Wudrintun. Rogero de Vudringtun . Willelmo de
Wydstand. Adam de Plasseto . Ricardo de Schottun clerico.
ct aliis.

CONFIRMACIO COMMUNIS REGIS SCOTTORUM SUPER TERRIS ET
LIBERTATIBUS MONASTERIT DE CALDSTREM. [1270.]

56, Alexander Dei gracia Rex Scottorum omnibus probis
hominibus suis totius terre sue salutem Sciatis nos conce:

e
et hae presenti carta nostra confirma

se donacionem illam quam

Patricius Comes de Dunbar fecit Deo et eeclesie beate Marie
de Caldstrem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et inper-
petuuim sernituris de tota terra sua in villa de Llaynall scilicet
del Suthtun de Laynall cum pertinencijs Tenendam et habendam
ciisdem monialibus [de] dicto comite et heredibus suis eum
omnibus libertatibus asiamentis et pertinenciis suis tam infra
yillam quam extra sine aliquo retencione subtraccione vel
diminueione in liberam puram et perpetuam elimosinam adeo
libere quiete plenarie et honoritice sicut aliqua elim
toto regno nostro liberius quiecius plenius et honorificencius
ab aliquo tenetur et possidetur Et sient carta dicti comitis
em monialibus exinde confecta plenius juste testatur Saluo
seruicio nostro de dicto Comite et heredibus suis . Testibus
Hugone de Berkeley justiciario Llandonie . Hugone de Habir-
nyth. Alexandro de Balliolo de Caueres. Alexandro de Wallibus .
Ricardo Syward. Bernardo de Monte Alto. Willelmo Biseth .

Tol.

na in

ci




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM, 41

Apud . . . . vieesimo primo die Junii anno regni nostri
vicesimo primo.

IRMACIO COMITIS P.

RICH OMNIUM TERRARUM MON.
DE CALDSTREM.

57. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptun
audituris Patricius Comes de Dunbar eternam in Domino

salttem Noueritis nos pro uobis et heredibus nostris diuine

pietatis intuitu concessisse et hac presenti carta nostra con-
firmasse Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldstrem et:
monialibus ibidem Deo
possessiones et libertatibus a predecessoribus
nostris et a nobis et aliis Chr
concessa

sancti

seruientibus et inperpetuum seruituris

onmes ter

i fidelibus similiter datas et
il et de Laynall et F
in territoriis earundem villarwn cum omnibus pertinenciis suis
et eciam Witcester cum omnibus suis pertinencijs terras eciam
possessiones et libertates quas habent in villis de Bastynden
et de Thornidich et in territoriis earundem cum suis pertin-
enciis necnon omnes alias terras pe
habent ex donacione cuiuscunque vel quorumeunque qui in

seu escaimbiatas in villis de Her:

essiones et libertates quas

comitatu nostro seu in dominio nostro consistant Tenendas
sibi et habendas inperpetuum adeo libere et quiete plenarie
pacifice et honorifice sicut aliqua elimosina in regno Scocie
liberius quiecius plenius et honorificencius tenctur et possidetur
ut carte nostre ct predecessorum nostrorum et omnium
aliorwnm super predictis donacionibus possessionibus et liber-
tatibus confecte plenius testantwr Et si
quod aliquis super predietis pi
tibus dictis monialibus iniuste iniurictur Nos et heredes nostri
iniuriam sibi illatam plenarie sine dilacione secundum assi
regni emendare faciemus Prohibemus eciam omnibus hominibus
qui sub dominio nostro et heredum nostrorum reguntur sub
plenaria forisfactura nostra et heredum nostrorwm ne dictis moni-
alibus vel hominibus n dictis tel

et si

contingat quod absit
ssionibus terris et liberta-

au

nomine earundem com-



42 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

morantibus molestiam seu grauaminem inferre presumant Nos
autem et heredes nostri dictas terras possessiones et libertates
cum omnimodis asiamentis suis et iustis pertinencijs eiisdem
monialibus warandizabimus et contra omnes homines inper-
petuum defendemus Ut autem hee nostra concessio et confir-
macio rata et inconcusse inperpetuum perseuerent presens

Fol. 54. scriptum sigilli nostri inpressione coroborauimus . Hiis testibus
Domino P. filio nostro. Domino Willelmo fratre nostro . Domino
Roberto fratre nostro. Dominis Alano de Harkars.P. filio
Walteri. Waltero fratre ecius. militibus.Dominis Alexandro de
HIersill . Galfrido de Werk, Adam de Brankestun , capellanis .
Johanne de Letanie . Willelmo filio Alani . Waltero de Dercestria .
et aliis.

CIONIS ET CONFIRMACIONIS TERRE IUX
HAUCHCISTON,

CARTA DON.

58. Sciant omnes tam presente quam futuri quod ego Willel-
mus de Haltun concessi et confirmaui quintum acras terre quas
Radulfus frater meus dedit in liberam et quietam elimosinam
ecclesie Sancte Marie et sanctimouialibus de Caldstrem pro
anima mea et pro animabus antecessorum et successorum
meorum sicut carta Radulfi fratris mei confirmat et contestatur
Testes continentur in carta.

LLITTERA ASSIDACIONIS TERRE DE LITILL SWYNTON PER
DOMINUM ErusDEM, [1424.]

59. Be it mad kend till all men be yt present lettres me Jon
of Swynton lord of yat ilk till haue fulli grantit to ye priores
of Caldestreme and ye conuent al ye land of Litill Swynton
with ye pertinans durand for ye termes of x zher for ye ravard
mad and fer to be mad to me bath temporal and spiritual
Quarfor I give bidding till all y' lauge me ayris
and assignes balze or serzeand yat yai mak ony letting or obsta-

executuris




CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM. 45

kil or punding for ye said land bot gif I ye said John do it in
propre person. Also it is accordit yt quhat tym I ye said Jon
liks to haue ye said land to myn awne propir vse ye said priores
and ye conuent sal deliver it bot ony demavnd ye said priores
and ye conuent sal enter in ye tak of ye said land at Quwitson-
day in ye zher of our Lord a m™° eecc™® xxiiij. In ye vitnes
of ye quhilk thyng to yir present lettres I haue set to my selle
at Dunbar.

LLITERA ASSIDACIONIS TERRE DE LITILL SWYNTON PER TRIOREM
DE COLDINGHAME, [1426.]

60. Be it kend till all men be yir present lettres ws
Wilzame Drax priour of Coldynghame till haue set and to ferme
lattyn al ye landis of Litill Swynton with ye pertenans per-
at may pertene in tyme to cum be reson of warde
pertenand till ws, to ye priores and ye conuent of Caldstreme
for [al] ye tym yat ye land is in varde till ws ye said priores
payand till ws zerli xls. of usuel mone of Scotland at thua
vsuel termes of ye zher y* is to say Qwitsonday and Martimes
pessabilli josand ye said lands. In ye vitnes of ye quhilk thyng
to yir present lettres we haue set to our selle at Swynton ye
xxij day of ye moneth of Julii ye zher of our Lord a thusand
four hundred xxvj zher.

tenand to w:

plicit copia omnium Cartarum Monasterij de Caldstrem
redactarum tn seriptis per Notarium Publicum. [1434]

In Dei nomine Amen cunctis euidencius
anno Domini millesimo ecce? x:

innotescat quod
quarto tercia die mensis Aprilis
Sanctissimi in Christo patris domini nostri Eugenii pape
quarti_ anno iij° indiccione xij*. Venerabilis et magne religionis
Domina. Domina Mariota priorissa tune temporis de Caldstrem
et eiusdem loci connentus. Vnanimo consensu et assensn.
Cartas . euidencias . munimenta . donaciones .concessiones . et con-

Pol, 55.



44 CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTREM.

tirmaciones. mihi notario infraseripto in suo capitulo euidentes
particulariter produxerunt . et tum propter vetustatem . tum
propter metum anglicorum . presertim attento quod ipsis anglicis
proxime commorantur tum propter delaciones hine et inde

varias earnndem et maxime ne fortuitis casibus sicut incendio
et huiusmodi pretextn originalium in suis peragendis veritas
deperiret. transumi copiari per me notarium infrascriptum et in

scriptis redigi fideliter postularunt . quarum quidem donacionnm

concessionum confirmacionum et aliorum munimentorum ex-

emplaria alias exempla per alium de verbo in verbum transeribi
transumi et [feci] veraciter copiari mihi fidedignum vt in isto
libro seriatim suo ordine congrne et plenius continentur . Ipsis
autem per me visis palpatis rimatis consideratis verins et
perlectis coram his testibus viz. Magistro Willelmo Bell bacha-
lario in decretis. Patricio Blakborn . et Henrico Kyngornie. preshi-
teris.cum multis aliis vocatis in testimonio et rogatis.in fidem
et testimoninm veritatis omninm premissorum hic me ego
Johannes Laurencius in deecretis licentiatus notarius publicus
i gnu solitum.

anctoritate apostolica subscribens ac posts:

[The following are sevibbled on a lank leaf of the Chartulary.]
For Biep STancuyy.

Lord has yow was don on rud throw ye my fulnes stem yis
Ilud, Fadi, and Son, and Maly Gast, stem and stanch yis blud
in hast. sucht fast lord in persons thre, I nam yis nam in nam of
ye, ab yan say ye man or woman nam and yat ilk a forbyddyn
for byd Tye. yat Thu partit land and fe and yan say v Pater
Nosters and v Awe Maryas and a owrd. and say yis oryson




45

CARTE MONIALIUM DE CALDSTI

and ilk tym wyth v Pater Nostris and vy Awe Maryas and
a owrd, and gif it stanchis not quhan it is said thris, yan say
it ix tymis.

Zit ar yar thre dayiss in ye zer at ar most perelluss and con-
trar, of August ye fyrst Monwnday, ye next of Decembir.
my fay ye thrid Monwnday owt geingand of Awerhill yns ber on
hand quhar for on yr thre dayis na man lat hys blud na wayss
be gyn na waas na na ress na wirk na werk na eit na geess, for
guha sa doiss leper beiss yen saiss ye buk and de and feiss.



APPENDIX

oF

ORIGINAL CHARTERS AND OTNER DOCUMENTS.

I. Ricardus Dei gracia Sancti Andree episcopus . Omnibus
Sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis salutem . Nouerint tam posteri quam
presentes me pictatis intuitu concessisse et hac mea carta con-
firmasse ecclesie Sancte Marie de Kaldestrem et monialibus
ibidem Deo
elemosinam ipsum locum cum omnibus ei accidentibus et omni-
bus beneficiis que Cospatricius comes et Derdere comitissa
sponsa eius et Waldeuns filius et heres eorum eidem loco con-
cesserunt et dederunt . scilicet . in terris et aquis et piscationibus
et pascnis et ecclesiis de Lainhall et de Heresille . et in omnibus

seruientibus . ct seruituris in puram et perpetuam

earum pertinenciis . Sicut carte corum testantur et confirmant .
pro salute animarum suarum et omnium antecessorum et suc-
cessorum snorum . Volo itaque et episcopali auctoritate confirmo
ut predicta domus monialium prenominata beneficia uel si que
alia in episcopatu nostro fidelium Dei collatione in posterum
Deo propiciante pie consequi poterit . ita libere et quiete et
plenarie teneat et possideat. Sient aliqua domus religionis in
diocesi nostra liberius et quiecius tenet et possidet . Testibus
hiis . Andrea archidiacono Laudoniensi . Arnulfo decano . Johanne
nepote Roberti episcopi. G. decano de Stichel. Magistro Her-
berto. Alexandro eapellano. R. capellano archidiaconi. Magistro
Abraham . Radulfo de Boilell —Original tn ILM. Register House,
E




APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, PTC. 47

IT. Vuiversis Sancte Matris Kcclesic tiliis et fidelibus tam pre-
sentibus quam futuris visuris vel andituris hac literas . Villelmus
filius Patricii salutem. Nouerint omnes tam presentes quam
futuri me intuitu caritatis dedisse . et concessi:
- Deo et ecclesie Sancte Marie de Caldestrem .
et monialibus ibidem Deo seruientibus et seruituris ecclesiam
de Herisilles cum terris decimis.et obuencionibus et omnibus
aliis.ad predictam ecclesiam inste pertinentibus.in liberam.
puram et perpetuam elemosinam. ita libere. quiete . honorific
et plenarie. sicut carte comitis Cospatricii et comitis Waldeui. et
Patricii patris mei testantur et confirmant.et sieut aliqua
ecclesia in regno Scocie liberius. quiescius. honorificencius et
plenius.tenetur et possidetur. Hiis testibus. Patricio comite .
Patricio filio eius. Roberto de Merlei. Patricio filio Adam . Val-
tero filio Edgar . Alano de Rvle . Magistro Radulfo Sancti Andree
archidiacono . Johanne Laudoniensi archidiachono . Magistro
Laurencio officiale. Johanne diachono de Fogoue. Magistro
Henrico de Eccles. Patricio persona de Duns. Ade persona de
Kingor. Magistro Ade de Tlersille. Alexandro persona de
Lettam . Toma Freser . et multis aliis—Jb,

e et hac carta

mea confirmass

HII. Alexander Dei gracia Rex Scottorum omnibus probis
hominibus toci Sciatis nos sanctimoniales
de Kaldestreme te:
possessiones ac bona sua mobilia et imimobilia tam eccles
quam mundana sub firma pace et protectione nostra inste
suscepisse Quare firmiter inhibemus ne quis eis malum moles-
tiam injuriam seu grauamen aliquod inferre presumat iniuste

s terre sue salutem
‘as suas . homines suos et vninersas eorundem
astica

super nostram plenariam forisfacturam . Concessimus eciam
eisdem vt nullus namos suos.vel hominum svorum ecapiat pro
alicui debito . plegiagio. vel forisfacto . nisi pro eorundem pro-
prio debito . plegiagio . vel forisfacto . saluis burgis _ nostris
firmiter inhibentes ne quis contra hance concessionem nostram
isfac-

ipsos vexare presumat iniuste super nostram plenariam for’
turam. Mandamus insuper et firmiter precipimus justiciariis ,



48 APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC.

vieecomitibus . prepositis et eornm balliuis ad quos presentes
qui

litere peruenerint vt omnes illos in balliis suis
debita debent eisdem monialibus que ipse vel eorum certus
atornatus lator presencium cis ab eisdem debita rationabiliter
probare poterunt vel poterit.ad eadem debita eis inste et sine
dilatione reddenda prout iustum fuerit compellant Ita ne pro
corn defectu amplius inde iustam querimoniam audiamus.

seu burg!

Concessimus eciam eisdem monialibus vi onumibus libertatibus

gandeant quibus temporibus antecessorum nostrorum regum
Scocie ilustrium et nostris hacte

prohibentes ne quis cas super hiis contra hane concessionem

us vse sunt et gauise . firmiter

nostra vexa
factwwam Testibus venerabili patre J. episcopo Glasguensi . P.
Comite de Dunbar Johanne Cumyne et Hugone de Abrnicthyn
apud Rokisburch tertio die Maii anno regni nostri

we presumat iniuste super nostram plenariam foris-

TV. Omnibus Christi fidelibus has literas visuris uel audituris
Henricus de Hassekirke eternam in Domino salutem Nouerit
vniuersitas vestra me diuine pictatis intuitu et pro salute anime
mee . et antecessorum et successorum meorum . dedisse . con-

eet hac presenti carta mea confirmasse . Deo et ecclesie

Cessls:
Sancte Marie de Kaldestrem et monialibus ibidem Deo seruienti-
bus et inperpetuum seruituris terram que dicitur Bellingdene
cum omnibus suis iustis pertinenciis et preterea terram que
dicitur Todderig cum omnibus suis iustis pertinenciis . absque

aliqua retentione . subtractione. uel diminutione.Tenendas et
habendas dictis monialibus de me et heredibus meis in liberam .
pwam et perpetuam elemosinam inperpetuum . adeo libere et
quiete . plenarie et honorifice . sient aliqua elemosina alicubi in
toto regno Scocie liberius . quietius. plenarius. et honorificentius
et plenius tenetur et possidetur. Ego vero Henricus ct heredes
mei dictas terras cum omnibus supradictis predictis monialibus
contra oumes homines et feminas inperpetwun warantizabimus .
defendemus et acquietabimus. Subieci insuper me et heredes
meos iurisdictioni archidiaconi Thenidalie et decani einsdem loci



c. 49

APE

DIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS,

qui pro tempore ibidem fueriné qui nos sine aliqua contradictione
per censnran ecclesiasticam si necesse fuerit compellere possint .

tam ad warantizanduim et defendendim dictas terras cum suis

pertinentiis. quam ad satisfaciendum dictis monialibus per
visum virormm fidedignorum de iniuriis et iacturis ol defectum

warantie mei et heredwm meorun cisdem illatis. Iv euius rei

testimonium presenti. veripto sigillam meu apposui. Hi
testibus Domino Patricio Comite de Dunbar . Roberto Dei gracia
abbate de Kalkow, Dominis Willelmo filio comitis et Ranulpho
de Bonekil. Dominis Johanne de Sancto Micacle Andrea de
Siutun Allexandro la Vache militibus. Alexandro de Cheshelme .
Radulpho Locke . Dominis Galfrido . Ada. Johanne capellanis de
Kaldestrem. Waltero de Staueley . Radulfo de Mulynaus . Wal-
—Ib.

tero de Dercester. et multis al

RIJ DE CALDSTREME TERRAS DE
SYMPRYN,

CARTA MONACHT MONAS'

V. Jacobus Dei gratia Rex Scotorwn Omnibus probis homini-
bus suis ad quos presentes litere pernenerint salutem Quia con-
firmauimms cartam confirmationis alias factam per progenitorem
nostrum bone memorie Jacobum secundum de donatione et

oratricibus nostris
se et conuentni monialinm monasterij nostri de Cald-
facta per quondai Georgium Schoriswode
is de Simprin prout in

vam de Simpryn dil

priori

streme de carta eis

episcopum Brechinensem de dictis tei
carta confirmationis progenitoris nostri plenius continetur saluis
nobis orationmm suflragijs denotarum. In cuins rei testi-
mionimn huie presenti carte nostre magnum sigillum nostrum
0 patribus Jacobo

no Thoma

ibus Reuerendis in ©

apponi precipinis te

episcopo Sancti Andree consanguineo nostro ca

episcopo Dumblanensi Johanne episcopo Morauiensi Niniano

episcopo Candidicase dilecto fratre nostro Jacobo comite Adholie

dilectis consanguineis uostris Jacobo Domino Levingstoun

magno camerario nostro Patricio Domino le Grahame, Andrea
D



50 APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC.

Domino le Gray, Willelmo de Morauia de Tulibardyn et
Magistro Johanne Arouse Archidiacono Glasguensi secretario
nostro apud Perth vicesimotercio die mensis Julij anno Domini
millesimo quadringentesimo quinqnagesimo nono et regni nostri
vicesimotertio. In euius rei testimonium presenti carte nostre
apponi precipimus magnum sigillum nostrum Testibus Reuer-
endo in Christo patre Thoma episcopo Abirdonensi dilectis
consanguineis nostris Andrea Domino Avandale Colino comite
de Ergile Domino Lorne Magistro hospieij nostri Danid comite
de Craufurde Domino Lindesay Johanni de Colquhone de
eodem milite Me
trorum rotulorum et registri Ar

istris Danid Guthre de eodem clerico nos-
hibaldo de Quhitlaw, Archi-
diacono Landonie secretario nostro et Johanne Layr ctore de
Newlandis apud Edinburgh s Junij anno
Domini Mv iiijme Iyxije et vegni nostri duodecimo.—Great Seal
Reg., book vii., No. 146.

ry

xto die ime

CARTA CONFIRMATIONIS PRIORISSE
CALDSTRE:

Vi.
nibus suis ad quos presentes litere peruenerint salutem Sciatis

acobus Dei gratia Rex Scotornm Omnibus probis homi-

nos ob intimam singularemque deuotionem quam habemus

erga beatissimam gloriosissimamque virginem Mariam. Et pro

summo etii

m fanore quem gerimus erga Monasterium nostrum
de Caldstreme et deuotas oratrices nostras priorissam et con-
nentum einsdem . In honore prefate gloriosissime Virginis Marie
fundatum cum anisamento et deliberatione nostri consilij in-

spexisse quandam cartam venditionis et alienationis factam per
Johannem Liddale de Lanell  predictis oratricibus  nostris
Mergarete Hoppringil priorisse moderne prefati monasterij de

Caldstreme et conventui eiusdem suisque successoribus de tota

ct integra carucata terre cum pertinentijs jacente in villa et
territoris de Lanell infra comitatum Merchie et vicecomitatum
nostram de Berwik ac de mandato nostro visam leetam in-



APPENDIX OF “ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC. 51

spectam et diligenter examinatam sanam integram non rasam
non eancellatam nec in aliqua sui parte suspectam ad plenum
vel
audituris Johannes Liddale de Lanell salutem in Domino sem-

intellexisse sub hac forma Omnibus hance cartam visuris

piternam Noveritis me non vi aut metu ductum nec errore
Japsum seu dolo circumuentum Sed mea mera pura propria et
spontanea voluntate vtilitateque mea vndique previsa et con-

siderata dedisse concessisse vendidisse tituloque pure vendi-

tionis alienasse et hac presenti carta mea pro perpetuo confir-

masse necnon dare conecd yendere et alienare et hac

presenti carta mea pro perpetuo confirmare venerabili et
Religiose Domine. Domine Margarete Hoppringil priorisse
monasterij monialium de Caldstreme et connentui ciusdem
totum et integram illam meam carncatam terre cum pertinentijs
jacentem in villa et tervitorio de Lanell infra comitatum Mer-
chie et vicecomitatum Berwici pro quadam certa summa
monete Scotie michi per prefatam Dominam

pecunie vsualis

priorissam ct connentum antedictum in mea magna cognita
et vrgente necessitate gratanter et integre persoluta et in vsum
meum totaliter connersa de quaquidem summa pecunie teneo
me bene contentum plenarie et integre persolutum prefatamque
Dominam priorissam et conuentum antedictum et suecessores
s pro me et heredibus meis quibuscunque inde quitteclamo

sw

imperpetuum presentis carte mee per tenorem Tenendam et
cum
e conuentui antedicto et

habendam totam et integram predictam carucatam te:
pertinentijs prefate Domine priori
successoribus suis prefati monasterij priorisse et monialibus de
Domino nostro rege. In feodo et hereditate imperpetuam per
omnes rectas metas antiquas et diuisas suas prout jacet in
longitudine et latitudine in vijs semitis aquis stagnis planis
pratis pasenis et pasturis petarijs turbarij
bus et genestis cum aucupacionibus venacionibus piseacionibus

is carbonarijs nemori-

herezeldis et merchetis mulierum cum communi pastura
liberoque introitu et exitu necnon cum omnibus alijs et

commoditatibus libertatibus et asiamentis ac justis pertinentijs

ingulis




52 APPENDIX OF ORIG

NAL CHARTERS, ETC.

suis quibuscunqne tam non nominatis quam nominatis tam sub
terra quam supra terram tam procul quam prope in sew ad
predictam carucatam terre cum pertinentijs spectantibus seu
juste spectare valentibus quomodolibet in futurnm libere quiete
plenarie integre honorifice bene et in pace sicut alique terre
eum pertinentijs alicui liberins quiecius plenarius integrins
mnelius pacificentius aut honorificentius dantur seu conceduntur
sine poterint dari concedi vendi aut alienari per quoseunque
infra regnum Scotie. Et adeo libere et quiete sient ego seu
predecessores mei prefatam carncatum terre eum pertinentijs
tenui seu possedi tennerunt sen possedernnt aliqno tempore
retroacto sine quocunqne contradictione impedimento aut
obstaculo aliquali Reddendo inde annnatim prefata Domina
priorissa conuentus predictus et suc
Regi et

sores sui Domino nostro

suis successoribus vnum par cirothecarum ad aucipitrem
vel duodecim denarios ysnalis monete Scotie super solum dicte
carneate terre in festo beate Michaelis archangeli nomine albe
firme tautum si petatur. Pro omni alio onere exactione demanda
sen sernitio seeulari que de predicta carneata terre eum per-
tinentijs per qnoscunque juste exigi poterunt quomodolibet vel
requiri . Et ego vero prefatus Johannes Liddale et heredes mei
totam et integram prefatam carucatam terre cw pertinentij
prefate Domine prior

se connentui antedicto et snecessoribus
suis adeo libere et quiete in omnibus et per omnia vt supra-
dictum est contra omnes mortales warantizabimus acqniet-
abimus et imperpetiun defendemus . In euins Rei testimoninm
sigillum meum proprinm presenti carte mee est appensum

Apud Caldstreme vicesimoquarto die mensis Junij anno

Domini millesimo quadringentesimo octuagesimo nono. Coram
dominis Thoma Donaldson Andrea Law et Willelmo Duncow
presbitris . Roberto Weddirhede , Willelmo Aldinevaw . Alex-
andro Aldineraw, Willelmo Donaldsoun , Thoma Weddirhede .
et Jacobo Tempill cum multi
donationem conces

alijs. Quamqnidem cartam et
jonem venditionem et alienationem in eadem
contentas in omnibus suis punctis et articulis conditionibus et




APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC. 53

modis ac cireumstancijs suis quibuscunqne forma pariter et
eflectu in omnibus et per omnia approbamms ratificaums et pro
nobis et succes

oribus nostris vb premissum est pro perpetuo
confirmamus ac insuper in honorem Dei omnipotentis pre-
fateque gloriosissime virginis Marie eius matris necnon pro

lute anime uostre et animarwm quondam bone memorie patris
et matris nostrum omniumyue predecessormm et suceessormm
nostrorum Dedimus et concessimus tenoreque presentis carte
nostre de nostris gratia et fanore specialibus pro nobis et sne-
c

ssoribus nostris pro perpetuo confirmamus damus et con-
cedimus dictis priorisse et conuentui prefati nostri monasterij
de Caldstreme et suis successoribus omne jus et clamewn que
nos aut suecessores nostri habemus seu quouismodo habere
poterimns infattrimm in sew ad prefatam carucatam terre cwn
pertinentijs cum omnibus et singulis libertatibus commoii-
tatily quibuscunque libere
quiete plenarie integre honovifice bene et in pace in omnibus
et per omnia secundwn formam et tenorem prefate carte eis vt

s et asiamentis ac justis pertinentij

premittitur per predictum Johaunem Liddale desuper confecte
Preterea nos zelo et amore qnibus supra exoueramus et quitte-
clamamus ae tenore presentis carte nostre pro nobis et succes-
soribus nostris pro perpetuo exoneramus et quitteclamamus
prefatas priorissam et conuentum dicti nostri monasterij de

Caldstreme et suecessores suos ciusdem nostri monasterij

priorissam et moniales de omni onere seculari mundanoque
sernicio qualicnnyue de predicta carucata terre cum pertin-

entijs per prefatum Johannem aut predecessores suos quos-

cunqne nobis aut predecessoribus nostris retroactis temporibus

debitis et consuetis. Faciendo inde dicta priovissa et connentus

ae successores sui in futur pro nobis et suecessoribus nostris
ceterisque animabus supra narratis orationum sufiragia deno-
tarun tantum. In cuius Rei testimonium presenti carte nostre
confirmationis donacionis et concessionis magnum sigillum
nostrum apponi precepimus.Testibus Reuerendis in Christo
patribus . Roberto episcopo Glasgnensi . Willelmo episcopo Aher-



54 APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC.

donensi . dilectis consanguineis nostris Colino Comite de Ergile.
Domino Camphele et Lorne Cancellario nostro. Patricio Comite
de Boithvile. Domino Halis, etc.. Alexandro Hume de eodem
magno Camerario nostro. Johanne Domino Glammys. Johanne
Domino Drummond Justiciarijs nostris . Willelmo Domino
Sancti Johannis Magistro hospicij nostri ac nostro thesaurario .
venerabili in Christo patre Johanne priore Sanctiandree nostri
secreti sigilli custode. Andrea Domino Gray. Laurentio Domino
Oliphant . et dilectis clericis nostris magistris Ricardo Murehede
decano Glasguensi rotulorum nostrorum et registri ae consilij
clerico et Archibaldo Quhitelaw sub-decano Glasguensi secre-
tario nostro Apud Edinburgh decimo quarto die mensis Februarij
anno Domini Millesimo quadringentesimo octnagesimo nono et
regui nostri secundo,—JZb., hook xii., No. 366.

CARTA CONFIRMATIONIS PRIORISSE ET CONUENTUS MONASTERIT
DE CAULDSTREME,

VII. Jacobus Dei gracia Rex Scotorum Omnibus probis
hominibus Totius terre sue clericis et laicis salutem . Sciatis nos
quandam cartam alienationis et venditionis factam per Alexs
drum Ellem de Butterdene denotis nostris oratricibus priorisse
et conuentui mouasterij nostri de Cauldstreme et earum succes-

ne

soribus de tota et integra sua dimedietate vnius terre lusbandie
in Hirsell cum pertinentijs jacente infra villam et territorium
de Tlirsell et vicecomitatum nostrum de Beruik de nobis et sue-
cessoribus nostris tenenda de mandato nostro visam lectam in-
spectam et diligenter examinatam sanam integram non rasam

non cancellatam nee in aliqua sui parte suspectam ad plenum
intellexisse sub hae forma. Omnibus hane ecartam visuris vel
audituris Alexander Ellem de Butterdene ac dominus dimedieta-
tis vnius terre husbandie de Hirsell salutem domino sempiternam
noueritis me vendidisse tituloque pure venditionis alienasse et
hac presenti carta mea pro perpetuo confirmasse necnon vendere
alienare et hac presenti earta mea confirmare pro perpetuo




x

x

APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHA o

RTERS, ETC.

venerabili et denote domine Isobelle permissione Diuina priorisse

mon
cessoribus Totam et integram meam dimedietatem vnins terre

terij de Cauldstreme et monialibus eiusdem et eartm suc-

husbandie in Hirsell cum suis pertinentijs jacentem infra villam
et territorium de Hirsell et vicecomitatum de Beruik pro qnadam

certa summa pecunie mihi per prefatam priorissam pre manibus
gratanter et integre persoluta in pecunia numerata et in vst
ineum totaliter connersa de quaquidem summa pecunie teneo
me bene contentum ac plenarie et integre persolutam pre-
fatamque priorissam dicti monasterij et conuentum eiusdem et
smog successores pro me meis heredibus executoribus et assignatis
de eadem quittos inde clamo imperpetuum presentis carte mee
per tenorem.Tenendam et habendam totam et integram pre-

fatam dimedietatem antedicte terre husbandie in Hersell cum
suis pertinentijs prefate priorisse et monialibus dicti monasterij
de Cauldstreme et earnm successoribus a me heredibus meis et
assignatis de Supremo domino nostro rege et suecessoribus suis
in feodo et hereditate imperpetuum Per omnes rectas metas
suas antiquas et diuisas prout jacent in longitudine et latitudine
In domibus edificijs boscis planis moris marresijs vijs semitis
aquis stagnis rinolis pratis pascnis et pasturis molendinis mul-
turis et corm sequelis aucupationibus venationibus piscationi-
bus petarijs turbarijs carbonarijs cuniculis cunicularijs columbis
columbarij
bus et virgultis lignis lapicidijs lapide et calee cum curijs et
earum exitibus amerciamentis herezeldis bludewitis et nulierwn
merchetis em communi pastura libero introitn et exitu ac cum
oumibus alijs et singulis libertatibus commoditatibus proticuis
et asiamentis ac justis pertinentijs suis quibuscunque tam non
nominatis quam nominatis tam sub terra quam supra terran
procul et prope ad predictam dimedietatem antedicte terre hus-
bandie de Hirsell cum suis pertinentijs spectantibus seu juste
spectare valentibus quomodolibet in futurum libere quiete
plenarie integre honorifice bene et in pace sine aliquo impedi-
mento reuocatione contradictione aut obstaculo aliquali. Red-

brasinis fabrilibus bruerijs et genestis siluis nemori-




56 APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, Ee?

dendo inde annnatim dicta priorissa et conuentus dicti mon-

asterij et carmm successores prefato supremo domino nostro regi

et suis successoribus servicium debitum et consuetum tantum

pro omni alio onere exactione questione demanda seu sernitio
seculari que predicta dimedietate terre husbandie in Hirsell cum

suis pertinentijs per quoseunque juste exigi poterunt quomodo-
libet vel requiri. Et ego vero prefatus Alexander Ellem heredes

mei et a

ssignati Totam et integram prefatam dimedictatem
antedicte terre husbandie in Tfirsell cum suis pertinentijs pre-
fate priorisse et monialibus dicti monasterij de Canldstreme et
earum successoribus adeo libere et quiete. In omnibus et per
omnia forma pariter et eflectu vt prescriptum est contra ommes
mortales warantizabimus acquictabinus et imperpetuum de-
fendemus. In cuins rei testimoniuim sigilluam meum huie pre-
senti carte mee est appensum vnacum subscriptione mea mannali

apnd Edinburgh deeimo septimo die mensis anno Domini

millesimo quit testibus

videlieet Ma

ntesino trigesimo quinto coram hi

istro Johanne Lethame sub-decano  Eeclesie

Colligiate Sancte Trinitatis prope Edinburgh. Willehno Cok-
Immne de Chouslie. Niniano Ellem. Georgio Sinclar. Niniano
Cokbumne. et Donaldo Fowartoun . et Alexandro Young notario

publico cum diversis alijs. Quamyuidem cartam ac venditionem
et alienationem in cadem contentas. In omnibus suis punctis et

articulis conditionilus et modis ae circumstanci)

suis quibus-
cunque. In omnibus et per omnia forma pariter et effectu vt
premissum est approbamus av pro nobis et stccessoribus nostris
admortizamus et ad manum mortuam pro perpetuo confirmanns
saluis nobis et nostris suceessoribus denotarum oration
sutfiragg

dicte priorisse et conuentus et storm successormm
omni tempore afiuturo. In enius rei testimonium huie presenti
carte nostre confirmationis et admortizationis magnum sivillum
nostrum apponi precepimus . Testibus vt in alijs cartis prece-
dentibus consimilis date Apnd Strineling
Julij Anno regni nostri vie
294.

icesimo die mensis
simo secundo,—Zb., hook xxv., No,




APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC. 57

VUL A lettre maid to he priores and conuent of Caldstreme,
gevand the kingis fauoris, tollerance, and special licence to thaim,
thair tenantis, seruandis, and intromettouris, to in

Mow
with Inglesmen in bying or selling of vittalis, scheip, nolt,
tymmer, and vther leful guiis, for the reparatioun and vphalding
of thair place and als to be assuserit, and have protectioun of
Inglismen for wele and savite of thair place, landis, and guidis
on the bordouris, als weill in tyme of were, giff ony happinnis, as

in tyme of pece—Nochtwithstanding ony proclamatioun, ordin-

ance, or charge maid, or to be maid generaly be the king or his

wardanis, anent the im

srecommonyng and sitting apone Inglis-
sonerans, and als with power and licence to the said
priores and conuent, to assouer Inglismen to the nowmer of xij

menis

personis, or within, to cum als oft as neid beys to thare said

place of Caldstreme, to the effect aboue writtin, without ony
crime or fault to be imput to thaim tharethrow, with command

that nane vex nor inquiet thaim, ete. providing that thai, thair
tenantis, and seruandis, do nor attempt vther thingis that
may he preiudicial or hurt to his hienes realme and liegis, thir
his lettres for his will to indure, and ay and quhill he declar his
mynd be vtheris his speciale lettres in the contrare, ete. At
Edinburgh, the third day of Maij, the zere of God and king fore-
said, sie vt supra (1509 and Lth).—Subseriptum per dominum
regem.—Privy Seal Lvy., vol. iv., fol. 8b.

IX. A lettre of tak maid to the priores and convent of
Caldstreme, of the landis of Hirsale and Gradane, with thair
pertinents, liand within the erledome of Merche, for the termes
of v zeris efter the date hereof, ete., payand males and dewiteis
as the rentale proportis, ete. At Edinburgh, the xiiij day of
Tulij, the zer of God ve and x” zeris, of the king the xxiij zer.
—Subseriptum per regem.—Zb., vol. iv., fol. 682.

A lettre maid to the priores and convent of Caldstreme, of
ak of the landis of Hirsale and Gradane, with the pertinents




58 APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL CHARTERS, ETC.

liand within the earldome of Merch and sherefdome of Beruik,
for the termes of ix zeris nixt, and inmediat following the
termes quhilk the said priores and convent has thairof zit to
ryn, and at the ische thairof, quhilk ische salbe thare entra to
the said ix zeris tak, with power to mak subtenentis and vnder-
sittellis, or to occupy thaim with thair awn gudis, ete. payand
the rentale, etc. At Edinburgh, the viij day of Januar, the zer
forsaid.—Subseriptum per dominum regem.—Zb., vol. iv., fol.
163).



ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

1. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, for the safety of his son] and that
of Cecilia his wife, grants to God, and the Church of the Blessed
Mary of Caldestrem, and the nuns there serving God, all the land
in the vill and territory of Laynal, which was formerly Sir Patrick
Edger'’s, knight, with his men and their “sequele” and goods,
which land the said Sir Patrick Edger, knight, resigned to the
earl for defect of service, by staff and baton in full court. To
be held by the said nuns as freely as any alms is held in the
whole kingdom of Scotland.

2. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, grants to God and the Church of
St Mary of Caldestrem, all the land with toft and croft which
Sir Alan the chaplain, the son of Gilebert of Halsington, held
in the vill of Laynal, in free, pure, and perpetual alms, to be
held as freely as any alms is held in the kingdom of Scotland.

3. Earl Patrick grants to God, and St Mary, and the nuns of
Caldestrem, the land of Scaithemor, which Norman son of Nor-
man, gave to Amabilis his wife, in dower; but which the earl
grants to the nuns in perpetual alins, free of all service, for the
souls of all his ancestors, as the charter of Richard, son of Nor-
man, testifies.

4, Earl Patrick grants to God, and St Mary, and the holy
nuns of Caldestrem, in perpetual alms, the land of Scaithemor,
as Adam, son of Osbert, held it.

5. Richard, son of Norman of Leinhal, grants to God, and
St Mary, and the nuns of Caldestrem, the land of Scaithemor,
which his father Norman gave to Richard’s mother, Amabilis,




60 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

in dower, but which Richard gives to the nuns in perpetual
alms for the soul of Earl Waldeve and Countess Alin, his
spouse, and for the safety of the body of Earl Patrick, and for
his soul, and that of Countess Ada, his spouse, and the souls of
Richard’s father and mother, and his own and his wife’s souls,
ete.

6, Amahilis, wife of Norman of Leynal, grants to God and
the Church of St Mary of Caldestrem, her dower of the land of
Seaithemor for ever, in pure alms, as the charter of her son
Richard bears. The seals of Lord H., Abbot of Kelso, and her
son Richard, along with her own, are appended,

7. Earl Patrick of Dunbar confirms to God and the holy
nuns of Caldestrem, the whole chureh of Layuall with all its
pertinents, to be held in perpetual alms, as the charters of his
predecessors Earl Cospatric and Earl Waldeve, his father, attest.

8. Cospatric, the earl, to all his good men, “theins and drengs,”

clerks and laies. Grants to God and the sisters of “ Wite-
how” there serving Gud, the half of the church of Laynall, with
a half carncate of land, and one carncate of land, namely, half
of the land of Laynall, and another half of the land of Birghame,
in “perennial” alms; and “know ye [says the earl] that my

sponse, Derder, has given them one carueate of land of the land

of Ifirsell, and the church of the said vill, which I grant and
contin

and know ye that I have given to them a half caru-
land of the land of Layuall with Addoe, my cousin; and
know ye that Norman, son of Edulf, has given and granted to
the said nuns one carueate and a half of the land of Laynall,
with my consent, and that of Norman his heir; and ther
confirm that, and ordain that the foresaid nuns shall
quietly, and honourably for ever hold these alms, as any bene-

cate of

ore I

veely,

faetion is more freely or well held.” Among the witnesses is
“Walter, the earl’s son.” This may be an error for Waldeve, the
next earl, as no Walter is known.

9. Patri

of Cecilia his spouse, and the souls of his ancestors and sue-

k, Earl of Dunbar, for the safety of his soul, and that:



ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS. 61

cessors, has granted and confirmed to God, and the Chureh of
the Blessed Mary of Caldstvem, and the nuns there serving
God, all his lands in the vill of Laynall, viz. “le Suthtun” of
Laynal and pertinents, liberties, and easements, ete. in free,
pure, and perpetual alms, ete., and appends his seal.

10. Randulfus de Tfaultun grants and confirms to God, and
St Mary, and the holy nuns of Caldstrem, these seven acres of
land, which lie between their lands near Auttaslau, which were

his before the “conversion” of his daughter Matilda, for the
souls of his father and mother, and those of his ancestors and
successors, and for his own soul and that of his spouse Sierith,
in free, pure, and perpetual alms, ete.

11. “Cfospatric], the earl,” to all his good men, “theins and

dvengs,” clerks and Iaic
God and the sisters of Witehoh, in that place se!
carueate of land, viz., a half carueate of the land of Laynall, and
another half of the land of Birgham; and Derder, the countess,
his spouse, has given to the said sisters one carucate of the
land of Tlerishille and the church of said vill with all per-

greeting, has given and granted to

ving God, one

tinents; and Norman has given them one half carueate of the
Jand of Laynall in perennial alins,
for the safety of the donors’ souls, fre
for ever, etc. Aimong the witnesses are Countess Derder,
Waldef, son of the earl; Lambekin, the steward; and Emmulf de
Suinton.

12. P{atrick], called Edger, the son of Walter, grants for
himself and his heirs, to be firmly bound “fide media” to the

all which the earl coufinus

and quit of all services

master, prioress, and convent of Caldstrem, to quitclaim and
totally vesign by staff and baton his whole right of his land of
Laynall, with all its pertinents, without any retention, with all
his “men,” to his Lord Patrick, Em of Dunbar, in order to
infeft the muns of Caldstrem, whensoever it shall please the

2ts himself and his

heirs to the authority of the Lord Bishops of St Andrews and
Glasgow, and their officials, archdeacons, and deans for the

master and mus, although he strictly sul



62 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

time being, any one or two of whom chosen by the master,
prioress, and convent, may compel them at pleasure by “coher-
sitation” to the said resignation and quitclaim to be made to
the said earl whenever the said master, prioress, and convent
will, as well within the “curia” of the said earl as without
it, all cavil, exception, delay, and appeal being postponed, and
renouncing therein all remedy and aid of law, canon or civil,
and all privileges granted and to be granted to crusaders, and
all else which may any ways be objected against the present
writing, and which may avail the said Patrick and his heirs,
or hinder the said master, prioress, and convent. In witness

of which thing the granter appends his seal in “presence of
many men worthy of credit.” Dated at Caldstrem, the Friday
next after the Feast of St Denys (thus on the 13th October)
1273.

13. Mariota, Lady of Hume, formerly spouse of Sir Patrick
Edeger, in her lawful widowhood, has granted and quitclaimed
all her right within the vill of Laynall and without it, viz, of
the “ Northtun,” with all its pertinents, to God, and the Blessed
Mary of Caldestrem, and the nuns there serving God, as freely as
any widow in the kingdom of Scotland in her viduity could grant
or give, for a certain sum of money paid to her in her urgent
necessity. Appends her seal before witnesses. One of these
is Sir William, vicar of Assinden, master of Caldstrem.

14. P[atrick], son of Lord Pfatrick], Earl of Dunbar, has
confirmed to God, and the Church of the Blessed Mary of Cald-
strem, and the uuns there serving God and the Blessed Mary, all
that land which the said nuns hold in the vill and territory of
Laynall, of the grant of the lord, his father, together with the
houses of Berwick, which were David the tailor's, in the street
of Ramsden upon the Nesse, which houses they hold of the
grant of Lord P. the earl, his father, to be held by the said
nuns as freely and quietly as the charters thereof hy the fore-
said Lord P. the eavl, his father, to the foresaid nuns in them-
selves more fully bear. Appeuds his seal. Among the witnesses




ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS. 63,

are “ P. de Dunbar,” the son, and Sirs John and Alexander, the
brothers of the granter.

15. To all the sons of Moly Mother Chureh, William, the son
of Patrick, greeting. At the bidding of charity has given and
granted to God, and the Church of St Mary of Caldstrem, and
the nuns there serving God, the church of Herissille, with its
lands, tithes, and offerings, and all other just pertinents of said
church, in free, pure, and perpetual alms, as freely and quietly
as the charters of Earl Cospatric, and Earl Waldeve, and Patrick,
the granter’s father, witness and confirm, and as any church in
the kingdom of Scotland is more freely, quietly, honourably, and
fully held.

16. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, to all the faithful in Christ,
greeting. At the prompting of piety, for the safety of his soul,
and the souls of his ancestors and successors, has granted, given,
and confirmed to God, and the Church of the Blessed Mary of
Caldstrem, and the nuns there serving God, one carueate of land
in Haldhersehyll, with all its pertinents unreservedly, viz., that
carucate which Walter, called the chaplain, the son of Walter
the son of Thomas, the Knight of Derehestyr, held hereditarily of
the granter, and which the said Walter, for defect of the servic
due therefrom to the earl, resigned for himself and his 1 in
the eal’s “plena ewia” by staff and baton, and quitelaimed

for ever. To be held by the nuns in free, pure, and perpetual
alms. The earl and his heirs warrant the land against all men
and women. He appends his seal before witnesses.

17. P[atrick], Earl of Dunbar, to all the sons and the faithful of
Holy Mother Church, greeting. Tas granted, at the prompting
of charity, to God, and the Church of St Mary of Caldstrem, and
the nuns there serving God, the church of THerisehill, with lands,
tithes, and offerings, and anything justly pertaining thereto, in
free, pure, and perpetual als, as freely, quietly, honourably, and
fully as the charters of Earl Cospatric, and Earl Waldeve, and
Patrick, his uncle, and William, his [uncle’s] son, witness and
confirm, ete. One of the witnesses is “ Fergus, son of the Earl.”



O4 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

18. William, son of Patrick, to all the faithful of Christ, greet-
ing. At the prompting of piety, and for his soul and the souls of
his father and mother, and of all his ancestors and successors, he
gives, grants, and confirms to God, and St Mary of Caldstrem,
and the nuns there serving God, the land whieh is called
Rondes, and the meadow which is called Bradspotes, in his terri-
tory of Herisill, to be held of him and his heirs for ever, in
pure and perpetual alms, ete.

19. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, has given and confirmed to God,
and St Mary of Caldstrem, and the nuns there serving God, that
land at Hersil whieh lies next Leet on the south part of the bridge
as he had perambulated it to them, to be held in pure and
perfeet alms, ete. Appends his seal, Among the witnesses is
“Patrick, son of the Earl of Athol.”

20, Patrick the Knight, son of Lord Patrick, Earl of Dunbar,
grants to God, and the Church of St Mary of Caldstrem, and the
holy nuns there serving God, all that land next Leet whieh is
called Putanyshalwe, viz. from Leet on the east side entirely to
the land of the said nuns. To be held, ete. Appends his seal.

21. Walter, son of Sir Thomas of Dorcester, with consent of
his heirs, grants to the nuns of Caldstrem twelve aeres of land
which lie nearer his land in Huysheuigh in the south part, and

twelve acres in “Veteri Hersill,” viz. seven acres in one “cultura,”
and five acres in another “cultura” on the south part, for his soul

and his father’s soul, and the souls of his ancestors and suceessors,

and for participation in the benefits which are or shall be in said

abbey. To be held of the granter and his he

22. To all the faithful of Christ, Walter, son of Walter of
Der
Caldstrem the donation of his father (the lands as in preceding
abstract Nu. 21). Appends his seal before witnesses. One of
these is Walter, the farmer of the Lord Earl in Hersill.

23. Thomas, son of Walter of Dercestyr, confirms to the nuns
of Caldstrem all the lands, possessions, and liberties given and
vranted hy his father and his predecessors in the territories of

sin pure alms, ete.

ter, greeting. Has granted and confirmed to the nuns of




Se

ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS. 6.

Ald Hersil and Scaymor, with all their pertinents, ete. Appends
his seal before witnesses.

24, William, son of Patrick, gives and grants in pure and per-
petital alms to the nuns of Caldstrem all the land which they
hold in his fen of Hersill, viz, the land called Thotheryg and
Spechenes and Kaldstreflat, as freely as any perpetual alms is
held in the kingdom of Scotland.

25, Alexander of Syntun has given, granted, and quit-claimed
to the prioress and convent of Caldstrem, all the land of
Totheryg, with all the pertinents, liberties, and easements thereto
pertaining, which land he had of the gift of Sir Aymer de
Makyswell and his heirs. To be held as freely as the charter of
feu made to the said nuns, or the charter of the king, more fully
testifies. The granter and his heirs shall fully answer for all
things which may be exacted by the said Sir Aymer’s heirs from
the said land. Appends his seal before witnesses.

26. Earl Waldeve to all his good men and friends, and all the
beloved in Christ, greeting. After the gift by his father, Earl
Cospatric, of the half of the church of Laynal to the nuns of
Caldstrem, which he had confirmed, he gives and confirms in
angmentation the other half of said church after the death of the
“instituted parson.” Moreover, he gives and confirms to them
Witechestre by its right bounds, and as*much common in his
pastures lying around as [is necessary for] their own work horses
and one carucate of land in the “territory of Hersill” and common
of the said town, with all its pertinents, which Countess Derder,
his mother, gave them, and Earl Cospatric, his father, confirmed
by his charter, and he confinns all the land which Norman, son
of Edulf, gave them in Laynal by its right bounds, for the love
of God and safety of his soul, and those of all his ancestors and

successors, in free and perpetual alms, ete.

27. David, the marshal, declares that the controversy between
himself and-the nuns of Caldstrem regarding the land lying
between Witchestyr and Ottyrburn is thus settled—that he

and his heirs have quit-claimed to the said nuns the foresaid
E



66 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

land, from that place where Heselihow falls into “ Dvi” towards
the mountain as far as the source (ebullicio) of the rivulet of
Heselihow, and thereafter crossing the moor to the head of the
“petarium ” towards the north, so that neither he nor his heirs
shall claim any right beyond the said boundaries. Appends his
seal before witnesses.

Among these are Nesius de Walton and Richard Namus or
Le Neym, the latter of a family which held large territories on
the Border, in Tweeddale and in Buchan (Orig. Par. Scot., vol. i.;
v. Broughton).

28. Henry, son of Cunan, declares that a similar dispute
between himself and the nuns regarding the said lands was
settled in the same manner. Appends his seal before the same
witnesses,

29. Patrick, son of Earl Patrick of Dunbar, grants to the nuns
all the land of Selbuclethe, which Alan son of Thomas held, by
the same right bounds by which Alan held it, by gift of the
granter’s father. And, in addition, the granter gives to the nuns
all the grazi
across as f

ng from the head of Wlveshope outside of the wood

r as the valley descending between Farniley and
Strikesley, descending upon the rivulet of Crumbesyde, and so
ascending by that rivulet between Crumbesyde and Sengedewde
up to the bounds between the lord earl, his father, and William
de Vepunt. To be held by the nuns of his father and his heirs, in
pure and perpetual alms, ete., as his father’s charter purports.

30. A confirmation hy the same of the preceding charter,
somewhat fuller in its terms. The grauter’s seal is appended.
One of the witnesses is “Hugh, the forester of Duns.”

31. Richard, son of Hugh the cook of Dercester, grants to the
nuns one toft in the town of Dercester, with a rood of land
adjacent thereto for ever, rendering thence yearly to the granter

or his heirs, for all ser
pound of cumin or three halfpennies, at the fair of Nokesburgh.
Appends his seal.

29

32. Alan, son of Thomas, son of Elene, grants to the nuns an

ice, custom, and secular demand, one



ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS. 67

acre and a half of land in the west part of his croft, with the
toft joined to the said land, and three acres of land in the
“enltura” called Spitelflat, in the territory of Dercestyr, with all
their pertinents, etc, as well within as without the town of
Dercestyr, in free alms for ever, etc. Appends his seal.

33. Alan, son of Thomas of Dercestyr, grants and confirms
to Sir Walter the chaplain, son of Walter, son of Swardy, one
acre of land in the town of Dercestyr, lying next the way
which is called Cakewellegat, on the east part, with all per-
tinents, ete. To be held of the granter and his heirs for the
yearly reddendo of one penny, or a pair of gloves at the Feast
of St James the Apostle, in name of feu-farm, ete.

One of the witnesses is Sir John Gray, then the steward of
Sir Patrick, the earl.

34. Walter, the chaplain, grants to God, and St Mary’s Church
of Caldstrem, and the holy nuns there, a toft and croft in the
town of Dercestyr, on the east side of the way, called Cakewelle-
gat, to make a “pitancia” to the said nuns on the morrow of St
Lawrence the Martyr, for the soul of Matilda, the granter’s
mother, and of his ancestors and successors, in free alms,
with the common grazing of the town of Dercestyr, and all
other common easements, etc. He also gives to the nuns,
with consent of Walter, son of Swardy, his father, one acre
and a half of land lying upon Coteflatte, on the east side of
the land . . . in pure and perfect alms. The granter
appends his seal.

35. William, son of Patrick of Hersill, grants to God, and St
Mary, and the convent of Caldstrem, the whole common grazing
of Thornidicke, for forty mares and their followers, until the said
following shall attain the age of three years, and for eighty “ beasts
of labour” (averia),and for eighty swine,and for two hundred ewes,
so that the ewes, besides the foresaid grazing, shall enjoy the com-
mon easement and grazing of Gordon wherever they can reach it.
But if the said “ beasts” or swine shall by chance have strayed
beyond the bounds of the said grazing of Thornidicke towards the



68 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

grazing of Gordon, no fine shall be demanded therefor. But for
the keeping of the foresaid swine, the said convent shall make no
enclosure in its land. The granter has confirmed this gift for the
safety of his soul, and of those of his ancestors and successors,
to be held in pure alms as the charter of Thomas of Gordon
attests. One of the witnesses is H., Archdeacon of Dunkeld.

36. Thomas of Gordon grants to the convent the said grazings
in precisely similar terms.

37. Thomas of Gordon, son of Sir Thomas of Gordon, knight,
grants to them the whole gift which his said father gave as in his
charter, excepting the eighty swine, for which the granter gives
to the said nuns in exchange common grazing in Thornidik and
in Gordon? for one hundred ewes, together with the two hundred

ewes aforesaid, and for twenty “avers” with the other eighty
“avers” before named in the common pasture of Thornidich in
his father’s charter, and in increase of his father’s gift, and for
his own, and his wife’s, and his father’s, and mother’s, and all
his ancestors’ and successors’ souls, the granter gives to the nuns
that land which lies between the fosse of the passage out of the
town, and the land formerly given by his father to them, in free
alnis, ete.

38. Thomas of Gordun, son of Thomas of Gordun, confirms to
the nuns the preceding grants of his father aud his overlord as
to the three hundred ewes, one hundred avers, and forty mares,
with their foals, with a clanse that neither the lord of the land
nor any other shall make any fence in the territory of Thornidich
in which the said mares and foals, “avers,” and ewes may not go
The said ewes also
enjoying, beside the grazing of Thornidich, the common grazing of
Thornidich, the common grazing of the granter’s town of Gordun
and easement everywhere, except growing corn and meadow.
He also declares that no “inprecacio” or fine shall be levied if

without any harassing or contradiction

1 This, as is known, was the original seat of the Gordons, whence they
migrated to the north, leaving nothing but the name behind them. They were
munificent benefactors to the house of Coldstream.




ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS, 69

uid animals by chance overleap the bounds of Thornidich
s the grazing of Gordon, and gives the land between the
fosse of the passage out of the town of Thornidich in the east
part, and the land formerly given to them by his father. And
if the nuns shall have men occupying, or shall have let the
foresaid lands to farm, those who shall have or hold the same
shall use the common easements of Thornidich as well in
grazings, and in “focalia” as in freedom of the amill, viz., that
the
which they have grown or have of the gift of the granter and
his father, in the land of Thornidich, at his rill, entire
multure, if it pleases them to grind there, so that it may be

id men as well as the said nuns may grind their corn,

y without

ground immediately after that which chances to be on the
“trimodium” at all times for ever, unless it happens to be the
granter’s demesne com; or they may lead their grain elsewhere
wherever it pleases them better.

39, Thomas of Gordun repeats the grant of common grazing of
Thornidich for forty mares and their following.

40, Thomas of Gordun grants to God, and the Church of St
Mary of Caldstrem, and the convent, one toft, which Reginald
the mason held, and four acres of land adjoining, measured with
the said toft in his land of Thornidich, to receive and shelter the
“avers” which are specified in the other grant they hold from
him, and, likewise, four acres of meadow, measured in the
meadow called “Lene dimedii.” To he held by the granter and
his heirs in free alms. Richard, Abbot of Kelso, is one of the
witnesses.

41. Thomas of Rawchburne grants to God, and the Church of
St Mary of Caldstrem, and the uuns, that meadow called Cam-
h, with the perti-
nents, to be held of the granter and his heirs in free alms.

minesmedu, lying in the territory of Thorni

42. Thomas of Rawehburn, son and heir of William of Raweh-
burn repeats the grant of same lands.

43. William of Mahle of Bastyndane grants to God and the
Church of St Mary of Bastynden, fifteen acres of land, eleven of



70 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

which lie in the field of Bakestanesden, and four acres at Hare-
law, and all the meadow at Strotherflat, and one acre of meadow
at Hunpul, and that toft and croft and two acres of land which
Adam, the poor clerk, at one time held, and besides, two acres of
land which lie at Heuedes, which said acres Robert of Mahle, the
granter’s “nepos,” gave to God and the said Holy Mother Church
of Bakestaneden, with all liberties and easements pertaining to
said town, for the souls of the granter’s father and mother, and
all his ancestors and successors, in pure and perpetual alms.

44. Robert of Maille, with consent of his heirs, grants to God,
and the Church of St Mary of Caldstrem, and the holy nuns
serving God there, seven (sie) acres of land in the field of Bastyn-
den with the pertinents, viz, in these places, four acres between
Fahelaue and the moor, and four acres at the head of the crofts,
in pure and perpetual alms, for the souls of his father and
mother, and ancestors and successors.

45. William of Mahile grants and confirms to the nuns that
toft and croft in the town of Bastynden, which Orm, brother of
Hutred the chaplain of said town, at one time held of the granter,
and two acres of land, one at Kukeflat and the other next
Harelaw above Watlandis, with their pertinents, in pure alms
for the soul of Earl Waldeve and his countess, and the granter’s
father and mother, and all his ancestors and successors.

46. Robert of Mayl, “nepos” of Garin of Mayl, with consent
of his heirs in time of peace, has given and granted to the
house of Caldstrem and the nuns there serving God, in pure
alms for the safety of his own and his ancestors’ and successors’
souls, all his land of Bastynden, viz
the chapel and his house, and besides, the land called Faulauche
and the meadow next that land, free from all custom and
exaction saving his lord’s right in terms of his charter.
“Dominus R.,” Abbot of Kelso, is a witness.

47. Roger, son of William of Bastynden, and Alicia, his (R.’s)

: the land adjacent between

wife, have quit-claimed all their right of service and suit of
court, and all other demands from the prioress and convent of



ABSTRACT OF CHARTE 71

Caldstrem or their assigns, in the territory of Bastynden, and
append their seals.

48. W., the boatman, burgess of Berwick, confirms to the nuns

acertain annual rent of 20s., to be uplifted from a certain land
in Uddinggate, in the town of Berwick, between the land of
Symon Flint on one part, and the land of William the gold-
worker, which he holds of the Abbot and convent of Kelso, on
the other, at two terms, viz.: 10s. at Pentecost, and 10s. at the
Feast of St Martin in winter. “Sir Mathew of Grenelau, maior
of Berwick,” is a witness.

49. Roger Nurys, burgess of Berwick, grants to the prioress
and convent of Caldstrem, that land in Corsgate, within the
town of Berwick, which he lawfully bought out of his own
funds, as it extends in length and breadth between the land of
Osbert Dute on one side, and the land of Margaret Bernham on
the other, to be held for payment to his lord the king, of six
pennies yearly in terms of the custom of the burgh.

50. Robert de Bernham, rector of the church of Tyningame,
confirms to the house of Caldstrem and the nuns one merk of
annual rent in pure alins, to be uplifted from Moger, son of
Martin the weaver, and his heirs or assigns, annually, for a
certain land which the said Roger holds of the granter in feu-
farm, which lies within the town of Berwick in Crosgate, be-
tween the land of Arthur on one side, and the land of John
Gray on the other, to be paid at two terms of the year, viz.:
half at Easter, and the other half at the Feast of St Michael.

51. William de Salle grants and confirms to God, and St
Mary of Caldstrem, and the nuns, all that land lying between
the granter’s stone house and the house of Jordan, his son-in-
law, with all messuages and other pertinents, to be held of the
granter and his heirs in pure alms, free of all claim and service

saving the king’s, viz., six pennies. Among the witnesses are

“Bartholomew, Provost of Edinburgh, and William, his son.”
52. John of Dunbar, burgess of Berwick, grants to the house

of Caldstrem and the nuns, 20s. of silver, to be annually uplifted



72 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

from a certain land in the street of the shoemakers for ever,
the land which he bought from Symon Cnute, which land
lies between the land formerly of Thomas of Notingame on the
north side, and the land of William the Englishman on the
south. To be held of the granter and his heirs in pure alms.
“Sir Robert of Bernham, Maior of Berwick,” is a witness.

53. Thomas of Warndham, with consent of his heirs, has granted
and confirmed to the holy nuns of St Mary of Caldstrem one
acre of land with his “enltura” of the toft behind the hospital
of Banburch, in pure and perpetual alms, for the souls of his
father and mother, and all his ancestors and successors, in free
burgage, ete.

54. Ysouda, daughter of Wido, the glassmaker of AInewych,
of her free choice, and being in secular habit, has given and
confirmed to God, and the Blessed Mary of Caldstrem, and the
convent of nuns and sisters serving God there, for the souls of
Wido, her father, and Mariota, her mother, all her right in that
part of the aill of Sepley, with the pertinents which John le
Visconte of Stanford granted to her father Wido and herself,
for the fen-farm of one penny annually, ete. Among the wit-
nesses are Master Alan of Len, Archdeacon of Northwmber-
Jand; Lord Walter, Abbot of Alnwick; Ebiorard the German.

John of Plesset, for the safety of his soul and that of the
late Elene his wife, and all his ancestors and heirs, has given
and granted to God, and the Blessed Mary, and the nuns of
Caldstrem, in free, pure, and perfect alms, 40s. of annual rent of
his mill of Plesset, to be uplifted there by their certain attorney
from the granter and his heirs and assignees annually at two
terms, viz: 20s. at the Annunciation of the Blessed Mary, and
20s. at the Nativity of the Blessed Mary. But the granter has
assigned said rent specially for the dress! of his daughter Johanna,
who is a nun there, as long as she lives, and after her decease it

1 The word is wecw or eee, signifying an ornamental garment. John of
Plesset, the granter, was au eminent person in Northumbe

Jand in the reign of
Heury IL. Sce Hodgson’ “ Nerthumberland,” vol. ti, p. 294.




ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS, 73

may remain for the use of the said honse for ever. And should
it happen at any term that the payment of said rent is not fully
made, then the granter and his heirs shall answer to the said
nuns for all expenses incurred in recovering it, as these shall be
established on the simple word of the master of the house or
the prioress. Among the witn
of New Minster, and Sirs Walter and Stephen, rectors of the
churches of Staunton and Morpeth.

56, Alexander, by the grace of God, King of Seots, to all good
men of his land greeting. Confirms the grant which Patrick,
Eal of Dunbar, made to God and the Chureh of the Blessed
Mary of Caldstrem, and the nuns, of all his land in the town of
Laynal, viz., the Southton of Laynal with the pertinents. [The
place where the king granted this deed has been omitted by the
notary.] Dated 21st June, in the twenty-first year of his reign
(1269).

57. Patrick,

ses are the Lord Adam, Abbot,

:1 of Dunbar, grants and confirms to the nuns
all the lands, possessions, and liberties given and granted or
exchanged by his predecessors and himself, and other faithful
Christians in the towns of Hersil and Laynall, and in the tervi-
tories of the said towns ; and also Witcester with all its pertinents ;
the lands, possessions, and liberties which they hold in the vills
of Bastynden and Thornidich, and their territories, with their
pertinents. Likewise, all other lands, possessions, and liberties
which they hold of the gift of all or any pe

ons who are in the

granter’s earldom or lordship. Any one unjustly injuring the
nuns in their possessions shall be foreed to make good the
same by an assize of the kingdom without delay. The earl
likewise, under his plenary forfeiture, prohibits all men under
his rule from daring to molest the nuns or their tenants in the
lands.

58. William of Haltun grants to the nuns five acres of land,
which his brother Radulfus gave in free and quiet alms to the
Church of St Mary and the nuns of Caldstrem.

59. John Swinton of that ilk lets to the prioress and conveut



74 ABSTRACT OF CHARTERS.

of Caldstrem the land of Little Swynton for ten years. The
rent is not stated, but is partly “temporal” and partly “spiritual.”
The term of entry is Whitsunday 1424.1

60. William Drax, prior of Coldingham, lets the same lands
(of which his house were the superior lords), and which were in
ward, by the death of John of Swinton and the minority of his
heir, to the prioress and convent of Caldstrem, for all the time
of their wardship, for the yearly rent of 40s., usual money of
Scotland, at two terms in the year, Whitsunday and Martinmas.
Dated 22d Jnly 1426.

THE NOTARY’S DOCQUET.

On 3d April 1434, in the third year of Pope Eugenius IV.,
and the twelfth indiction, John Laurence, licentiate in decretals
and notary-public, by apostolic authority, attests that a vener-
able and religions lady, Mariota, prioress of Caldstrem, and her

convent, duly assembled in chapter, produced to him all their

charters, evidents, muniments, grants, and confirmations—and
as partly on account of their age, partly on account of the fear
of the English, especially those dwelling nearest, and on account
of the various transfers of them hither and thither, and chiefly

lest by accidents, as fire and chance of this kind, in their transfer,

there was danger that the truth of the originals might peris
they demanded that the same should be faithfully copied in
writing by him, the said official; which the said notary proceeded
to do, all as certified by him before witnesses, ete.

1 The grant is executed at Dunbar, whence Swinton was probably embarking
or France. The next document confirms the received account of his death, with
many of his countrymen, in the disastrons battle of Vernenil.




ABSTRACT OF APPENDIX,

~

or

ABSTRACT OF APPENDIX OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS.

I. Richard, Bishop of St Andrews, confirms to the Church of
St Mary of Kaldestrem, the “place” with all its accessories and
benefits, which Earl Cospatric and Countess Derdere, his wife,
and Waldeve, their son and heir, granted in lands, waters, fish-
ings, and pastures, and the churches of Lainhall and Heresille.

Il. [This is in precisely the same terms and by the same
person, William, son of Patrick, as No. 15 of the chartulary—
but some of the witnesses are difterent.]

III. Alexander [11], King of Scots, takes the holy nuns of
Kaldestreme, their lands, men, and all their possessions, under

his “firm peace,” with all attendant privileges—that none shall
take pledges of them or their men for debt to another, only for
their own proper debt, ete. Roxburgh, 3d May, tourteenth year

of his reign [1263].1

TV. Henry of Hassekirke grants to the Church of St Mary of
Kaldestrem, the land called Bellingdene, and the land called
Todderig. Subjects himself and his heirs to the jurisdiction of
the Archdeacon of Teviotdale, ete.

V. James [IIL], King of Scots, contirms a previous charter of
confirmation, dated at Perth, 23d July 1459, under the great
seal of James IL, of the grant of the lands of Simpryn to his
beloved “oratrices,” the prioress and conyent of nuns of his
monastery of Caldstreme, made to them hy the deceased George

1 Among the witnesses is “J., Bishop of Glasgow.” This is Johu de Cheyam,
of whom, according to the editor of the “ Chartulary of Glasgow ” (vol. i. pref.,
Pp. xxxii.), not much is kuown, except that he was an Englishman, appointed

and consecrated by the Pope in opposition to the clection of the chapter, and that
he finally retired from his see to France, and died there in 1268.




76 ABSTRACT OF APPENDIX.

Schoriswode, Bishop of Brechin, The great seal is appended,
and the confirmation executed at Edinburgh, on the 6th June
1472, twelfth year of the granter’s reign. Several of the officers
of state are witnesses,

VI. James [IV.], King of Scots, with the advice and consent
of his council, grants inspeximus of a charter of sale made by
John Liddale of Lanele to Margaret Hoppringil, present priore:
and the convent, of all and whole a plough
the pertinents lying in the town and territory of Lanele, within
the county of March and sheriftdom of Berwick. [Here follows
the deed itself in the usual terms.) The annual reddendo is
one pair of hawking gloves or twelve pennies Scots, on the
ground of the said plough-gate, to be delivered or paid by the
lady prioress and convent to the king on the Feast of the
Blessed Michael the Archangel in name of blench farm, if asked
only. The deed is exeented at Caldstreme, 24th June 1489,
and the inspeximus at Edinburgh, on the 24th February follow-
ing, hefore the chancellor and other great officers of state.

88,

te of land, with

VIL James [V.], King of Scots, has inspected a certain
charter of sale, made by Alexander Ellem of Butterdene to the
prioress and convent of Cauldstreme, of all and whole his half of
a husband-land in Hirsell, with pertinents, lying within the
town and territory of Hirsell and sheriffdom of Berwick; by
royal command, seen, read, inspected, and diligently examined,
and in all respects entire. [Here follows the deed in the usual

terms. The prioress’s name is “Isobella.”] The granter,

ander Ellem, appends his seal and sign-manual, at Edin-
Irgh, 17th of the month(?) 1535. One of the witnesses is
Master John Lethame, sub-dean of the Collegiate Church of the
Holy Trinity, beside Edinburgh. The King’s Inspeximus is
executed at Stirling, 20th July, twenty-second year of his reign




SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE

‘ESTIMATE OF THE DAMAGE DONE BY THE ENGLISH ARMY AT

vie NUNNERY oF CoLpsTREAM, 28TH Marcy 1296.

Ces sunt le damaiges fetes a la meson de Coldestrem par le
noble prince roy de Engleterre et d’Escoce, le Mekirdi pro-
ehaine apres l'annunciacion la Virge, lan de grace M.ce. nonan-
tine sime, par leus et feus jurez et examinez en la presence sir
Jon, tresurer le roy, et frer Wautere son compaineyon, e autres
dou consaile le roy, ceste a savoire, par Wauter, mestre de meme
cele meson, freres Adam, Alaine, Alaine, Robert, Alaine et
Adam, freres de meme le meson, qui dient par lur veire dits ke
i vecenrent meme le jure avaundite par le veuu le roy en
domage, cest a saver, quarante et viij quarters de furment, pris
de checoune quarter vs., e de segle xl quarters, pris de checoune
quarter i
quarter vs., e de avaines

La summe dou ble, 1/7.

Item, de mere brebice iiije iiij* e xvij, ove taunt des ainyeus,
pris de checune huaile ove le ainele viijd., e cente moutons, pris
de checoune motoune viijd., de xj** hoggis, pris de checune vjd., e
de boves e vaches vij** e ix pris de checone iijs,
xl, pris de checone xviijd.,e de pors lxiiij, pris de checone xd., e
de affris

La somme de bestis, Lxij/.

., e de orge e de brais lvj quarters, pris de checone

** quarters, pris de checone quarter ijs,

e de jone bestis

<xiiij, pris de checone vs.

2 During the War of Independence the priory was sacked and the mns dis-
persed. In 1310, Beatrix de Hodesak, a former nun of Coldstream, having fled
from the House, was residing in a nunnery near Doneaster, In 1315, Archbishop
Greenfield, of York, addressed a letter to Thomas de Cresaker, stating that an
investigation bad been maie as to Beatrix de Hodesak, and that she had become
chores in the House near the bridge of Doncaster, where she still was, She
could not return to Coldstream, as the priory had been plundered and the sisters
dispersed. Thomas de Cresaker is ordered hy the archbishop to provide Beatrix
with five quarters of grain during her stay at Doncaster (Raine’s “Hist. Papers,
te,” in Rolls Series; see also, as to condition of the convent, “ Registram
Palat. Dunehn,”).

ana




78 SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE.

Item, ceo fete a remembrer ke le pomer de Caldestrem solait
valer par an en comuns anees cs, ors pris la despens de Ja maison;
e pur ceo ke la destrucion de lavandite pomer nene savons
mer, sait en le ordinaunce dou consaile le roy

En destrnecion de mesons deins la curte e dors, de chars, e
de charuce, e de merime, cs.

La summe totale exv

ij/. xvs.; de queus la meson a receu quinz
quarters de frument, e quinz quarters de feviz, e xvj quarters de
brais, par li maine Peris le clerk; e par la maine le tresurere
vj/. en deners.

Pris de chescun quarter de forment, xs.

Pris de cheseun quarter de feves, vijs. viijd.
vij

Sir Hugue de Cressingham, tresorer d’E
dec. berbiz, qui veyndrent du conte de Asceles, les queux mon-
sieur Robert Cambron, vicount de meismes le conte, lui ad fait
liverer, pris de chescun viijd., et xvj. boefs, pris de chescun iijs., de
le:

s de chescun quarter de bra

oce, leur fera liverer

J. boefs quil fist ausint venir de meisme le conte, e les autres

boefs sont livrez au larder le roy.

La somme de deniers, et du pris de forment, feves, brays,
boets, et berbiz desusditz, Vv. xjs. viij7. La quele somme sire
Hugue deit restorer e paier garderobe.

E cele somme abatue de la desusdite somme totale, est la

somme qui leur est due, Ixvij/. iij
[Dorso] Caldestrem.!

itijd.

[Translation]

These are the damages done to the house of Coldestrem by the
noble prince the King of England and Scotland, on the Wednes-
day next after the Annuneiation of the Virgin, the year of grace
1296, by loyal and faithful persons sworn and examined in
the presence of Sir John, the king’s treasurer, and brother
Walter, his companion, and others of the king’s council, viz. by

} Original in the Public Record Office. Printed in “Documents Illustrative of
the History of Scotland,” by the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, 1870, vol. ii., pp. 32-35.




SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE, 79

Walter, master of the same house, brothers Adam, Alan, Alan,
Robert, Alan, and Adam, brothers of the same house, who say, upon
their verdict, that they sustained damage on the same day afore-
said, through the coming of the king, viz.
price of each quarter 5s.; and of rye 40 quarters, price of each
quarter 4s. ; and of barley and malt 56 quarters, price of each

48 quarters of wheat,

quarter 5s.; and of oats 80 quarters, price of each quarter 2s.

The amount of the corn, 507.

Also, of ewes, four hundred and fourscore and seventeen,
with as many lambs, price of each sheep with the lamb, 8d.;
and 100 sheep, price of each sheep 8d.; of eleven score hoggs,
price of each 6d.; and of oxen and cows seven score and nine,
price of each 3s.; and of young beasts 40, price of each 18d. ;
and of pigs 64, price of each 10d.; and of work horses 24,
price of each 5s.

The amount of beasts, 62/. 15s.

Also, let it be remembered that the orchard of Caldestrem
used to be worth yearly in common years 100s., not counting
the consumption of the house; and since we cannot estimate
the destruction of the said orchard, let it be left to the arrange-
ment of the king’s council.

By destruction of houses within the court and without, of
carts, ploughs, and timber, 100s.

The sum total, 117/. 15s.; of which the house has received
15 quarters of wheat, and 15 quarters of beans, and 16 quarters
of malt, by the hand of Peter the clerk; and by the hand of the
treasurer £6 in money.

Price of each quarter of wheat, 10s.

Price of each quarter of beans, 7s. 8d.

Price of each quarter of malt, 7s.

Sir Hugh de Cressingham, Treasurer of Scotland, shall cause
to be delivered to them 700 sheep, to arrive from the county
of Athole, which Sir Robert Cambron, sheriff of the same
county, has caused to be delivered to him, price of each 8d. ;
and 16 oxen, price of each 3¢., of the 40 oxen which he caused



80 SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE.

also to come from the same county, and the other 24 oxen are
delivered to the king’s larder.

The amount of the money, and of the price of the wheat,
beans, malt, oxen, and sheep above-mentioned, 50/. 11s. 8d.
Which amount Sir Hugh is bound to restore and pay in the
wardrobe.

And that sum deducted from the above-mentioned sum total,
the sum which is due to them is 67/. 3s. 4d.

IL—Petrrion oF THE PRIORESS AND NUNS OF COLDSTREAM TO
Epwanp I.

“A nostre Seignur le Rey et a sun cunseyl prie la Prioresse
de Kaud

reme et les Noneynes, qe il lur voille doner sa
lettre a sun Vicount de Northumberland de aver seysine de
Jur Rentes ye sont dedeinz sa Baillie dount il furent engetez
par la Gere.”

[Endorsed]

“Scoc. Habeat breve de Cancellar. Vice[comiti] Northumbrie
quod ipse certificet que tenementa habnerunt in balliva sua ante
gnerram Scocie inchoatam, et qualiter tenverunt tenementa illa,
et quis modo ea tenet."—Parl. Petitions, Public Record Office,
No. 4660.

III—Manpares by Epwarp I. oN Benatr or tun Nuys
oF COoLDSTRRAM,

(1.) Rex dilecto clerico suo Hugoni de Cressingham thesaur-
ario suo Scotie salutem, Paupertati dilectaram nobis in Christo
priorisse et monialium de Caldstrem juxta Berewye pie com-
patientes vobis mandamus quod demandam quam eis fieri per
suman seacearii nostri Berewyci de undecim libris nobis ad
idem seacearium reddendis ponatis in respectum usque ad



SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE. 81

festum Pentecostes proxime futurum. Et distri
eis ea occasione fieri feceri
Teste rege apud Brummore 4
Rotuli Scotia, i. 39b.

ctionem si quam.
interim relaxari faciatis eisdem.
die Mari

er ipst recem,—
Per ipsum regem.

(2.) Rex dilectis et fidelibus suis Johanni de Warennia comiti
Surrie eustodi suo terre et regni Scotie et Hugoni de Cressing-
ham thesaurario suo ejusdem terre salutem. iatis quod cari-
tatis intuitu perdonavimus priorisse et monialibus de Caldestreme
illas undeciin libras et quatuor s

dlidos in quibus nobis tenentur

ad seaccarium nostrum Berewyci pro bladis et aliis victualibus
nostris per ipsas de ministris nostris partium illarum receptis et
que ab ipsis priorissa et monialibus per summonicionem scaccarii
predicti exiguntur. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod predictas
am et moniales de predictis undecim libris et quatuor
8 ciatis. Teste rege apud Westmonasteriun
xxi die Junii—J2., i, 420.

prior

IV.—Cnarter, To ISABEL HopprincILi, PRIORESS OF CALDSTREM,
AND THE CONVENT THEREOF, IN THE LANDS oF HirsEL,
AND OTHERS, 6TH SEPTEMBER 1528.

Jacobus, Dei gracia rex Seotorum omnibus probis hominibus
totius terre sue clericis et laicis salutem. Sciatis quia post dis-
solucionem per quondam nobilissimum patrem nostrum Jacobum.
quartum bone memorie cuins anime propicietwy Deus cum auis-
amento et consensu trium regni s

wi statuum in suo parliamento
d-
acione eorundum in feodifirma et hereditate pro policia et
edificacione infra regnwm suum habendis in augmentacionem
rentalis sui et proficuum patrimonii corone sue necnon habentes
considerationem quod priorissa et conuentus monasterii nostri

factam de annexacionibus terrarum ad coronam stam pro ass

de Caldstreme magnam hospitalitatem sustinent et ad huius-
modi subiectum ex

istunt et omnibus temporibus prompti fuer-
F



82 SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE.

unt ad recipiendum et honorabiliter tractandum tam ambassia-
tores Anglie et aliarum nacionwin regno nostro frequentantes
quam nostros ambassiatores cum aliis honestis personis apud
conuenciones supra marchias et alia tempora necessaria ad nostri
et regni nostri placenciam et honorem. Ideo ad snpportacionem
et auxilinm dicti nostri monasterii quod magnas largasque ex-
pensas modo predicto facit cum auisamento et consensu caris-
sime matris nostre regine habentis terras subscriptas in vitali

redditu et compotorum nostrorum rotulatoris dedimus conces-

sinus et ad feodifirmam dimisimus et hac presenti carta nostra

damus concedimus et ad feodifirmam dimittimus hereditarie
Dompne Isobelle Hoppringill priorisse dicti nostri monasterii
de Caldstreme et conuentui eiusdem et successoribus suis totas
‘as terras nostras de Hirsill et terciam partem terrarum
de Gradane cum piscacione eiusdem et suis pertinenciis prope

dictum nostrum monasterium jacentes supra marchias regni
nostri versus Angliam in comitatu nostro Marehie infra vice-
comitatum nostrum de Berwic extendentes in nostro rentali in
omnibus proficnis ad summam triginta sex librarum tresdecim
solidoram quatuor denariorum annuatim. Tenendas ct habendas
totas et integras predictas terras de Ilirsell et terciam partem
terrarum de Gradane cum suis pertinenciis dicte domine Iso-
belle priorisse dicti nostri monasterii de Caldstreme et con-
uentui ciusdem et suis successoribus de nobis et successoribus
nostris in feodifirma et hereditate imperpetuum per omnes rectas
metas suas antiquas et diuisas prout jacent in longitudine et
latitudine in boscis planis moris marresiis viis semitis aquis
stagnis riuolis pratis pascuis et pasturis aucupacionibus vena-
cionibus piscacionibus petariis turbariis carbonariis lignis lapi-

cidiis lapide et calce fabrilibus brasinis brueriis et genestis cam
curiis et earum exitibus herezeldis et merchetis cum communi
pastura libero introitu et exitu ac cum omnibus aliis et singulis
libertatibus commoditatibus proficuis et asiamentis ac justis
pertinenciis suis quibuscunque tam non nominatis quam nom-
inatis tam snb terra quam supra terram procul et prope ad



SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE. 83

predictas terras cum pertinenciis spectantibus seu juste spectare
valentibus quomodolibet in futurum libere quiete plenarie in-
tegre honorifice bene et in pace sine aliqua renocacione aut
contradictione quacunyue. Teddendo inde annuatim dicte
priorissa et conuentus et successores sui dicte carissime matri
nostre suis camerariis et factoribus durante vita sua et post ejus
decessum nobis et succe:
librarum usualis monete regni nostri ad duos anni terminos con-

oribus nostris summam quadraginta

suetos festa, viz., Penthecostes et Sancti Martini in hieme per
equales porciones nomine feoditirme in augmentacionem rentalis

nostri annuatim in omnib
wn ac eciam dicte priorissa connentus et successores sui
edificando et sustentando super dictis terris unam suflicientem

proficuis ad summam quinque mar.

ca

mansionem cum aula camera coquina orreo bostari columbario
et aliis policiis necess:
testimonium huic presenti carte nostre magnum sigillum nos-
trum apponi precipimus. Testibus ut in aliis cartis preceden-
tibus consimilis date. Apud Edinburgh sexto die mensis

solo correspondentibus. In cuius rei

Septembris anno Domini M. quingentesimo vicesimo octavo et
regni nostri decimo quinto—Ley. Mag. Siy., lib, xxii., No. 182.

V.—E ection or Prior

oF COLDSTREAM, Fepruary 23,
1537-8.

In Dei Nomine Amen. Reuerendissimo in Christo patri et
domino Jacobo miseratione diuina Sanctiandree archiepiscopo
totius regni Seotie primati legato nato etc. vestre humiles et
deuote filie moniales et connentus monasterii de Caldstrem
ordinis Cisterciensis dicte vestre Sanctiandree diocesis reueren-
tias debitas et honores. Quia propter vacationem priorissarum
desolationem diuturnam monasteria regularia incommoda magna
et grauia in spiritualibus et temporalibus pati consueuerunt
conditores sacrorum canonum prouida deliberatione statuendo
decreuerunt quod vitra mensem priorisse non vacet ecclesia
regularis, Ea propter recolende memorie Isobella quondam



84 SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE.

priorissa supradicti monasterii vigesimo sexto die mensis
Januaii Anno Domini j™ quingentesimo

K

simo septimo

v,

i

carnis

soluens debitum quod dolenter referrimus ip:
yeuerenter prout decuit ecclesia
mon:

sicut Domino placuit viam vniue in

essa nature

usque corpore
ice tradito sepulture ne ipsum

erium vacationis et desolationis sue incommoda diutius
deploraret et dispendiose sustineret statiin nos moniales et con-
uentus predicti ad tractuim campane more solito in capitulo dicti
monasterii in vnwn conuientes diem decimun tertium mensis
instantis Februarii anno predicto ad electionem future priorisse
nostre canonice celebrandam et ad omnia alia et singula pera-

genda que huiusmodi electionis negotinm concernere dinoscuntur
tamquain terminum canonicum legittimum et peremptorium pro
huiusmodi electione facienda duximus statuendum neenon
sque alios et
singulos sua communiter vel diuisim interesse habentes seu

omnes et singulas moniales dicti monasterii vniuersi

habere putantes et quos infrascriptum tangebat negotium seu
tangere poterit quomodolibet in futurum qui debuerant voluer-
ant et commode poterant dicte electioni interesse ad prefatos
terminum et diem literatorie citandos fore decreuimus et citari
cum intimatione quod sive in ipso termino seu die interessent
siue non presentes nihilominus moniales et conuentus predicte
ad electionem faciendam procederent ipsorum sic citatorum
absentiis sen contumatiis non obstantibus ipsisque vlterius
nullatenus expectatis, Citatis igitur interim omnibus et singulis
dicti monasterii monialibus et aliis interesse habentibus qui
electioni huiusmodi celebrande debuerant interesse dictis die et
termino post missam de Sancto Spiritu in dicto nostro monas-
terio deuote et solempniter celebratam nos moniales et conuentus
suprascripti videlicet dompne Isobella Ruthirfurd suppriorissa,
Katherina Flemyng, Joneta Broun, Mariota Ruthirfurd, Joneta
Kingorne, Elizabeth Hoppringill, Katrina Stevinstoun, Cristina
Todrik, Katrina Franche, Joneta Schaw, et Elena Riddall, capi-
tulum et conuentum pro tempore representantes ad hoe in domo
capitulari prefati monasterii ad sonum campane prout moris est



SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE. 85

omnes insimul congregate et de electionis negotio mature trac-
tantes ympno Veni Creator Spiritus Sancti gratia imploranda a
nobis genibus flexis flebilibusque vocibus precantato et omnibus
aliis in talibus fieri consuetis ritu obseruatis et completis omnes
et singule nulla penitus discrepante contradicente sed unaqua-
que diuina inspiratione repleta et Spiritus Sancti gratia vt firmiter
credimus illustrata repente nulla nominatione nulloque tractato
alio precedente solum Deum preoculis habentes in dompnam
Jonetam Hoppringill ipsius monasterii velatam et professam
monialeni virtutum meritis insignatam tamquam personam

magis ydoneam dignam et qualificatam in spiritualibus et tem-
poralibus cireumspectam et ad regimen et gubernationem eius-
dem nostri monasteri.

et reddituum eiusdem magis habilem et
expertam et industriosam etate legitima constitutam de legittimo
matrimonio et hones

rentibus procreatam regulam et reli-

gionem dicti monasterii preceteris expertam vna voce et vno
spiritu simul et vnanimiter vota nostra direximus et ipsam
dompnam Jonetam onmes et singule concorditer in nostram et
sam et animarum nostrarum patsricem

elegimus. Ac demun hniusmodi nostram electionem de eadem

dicti monasterii priori

ut premittitur factam eidem reuerenter prout decuit presen-
tamus ips

am suppliciter et instanter rogantes yuatenus votis

nostris et precibus pie annuens huiusmodi nostre electioni con-
sensum suum preberet benigne. Tandem ipsa electa (matura
deliberacione cum quibusdam consororibus et amicis suis pre-
habita licet ex humilitate et quadam pusillanimitate se insufli-
cientem indignam et inhabilem ad tam grande onus subeundum
asserens multipliciter excusé

ret) tamen jugo diuine vocationis
ceruicem cordis denote humilaus inuocato premitus diuine pie-
tatis
dam yvbi deuote electionem ipsam officium onusque humeris suis

auxilio humiliter votis nostris huiusmodi duxit assencien-

imposituin ut prodesse valeat mansuete suscipiens et pie accep-

tans ad honorem et laudem Dei ommipotentis et Beatissime
Virg it
fundatum et constructum. Tune nobis exultatione magna

nis Marie sub quortm vocabulis dictum monasterium ¢




86 SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE,

gaudentibus et vocibus altis ympnum Dei gloriosum Te Deum
Laudamus cantantibus campanis solempniter pulsatis ipsam
assumentes in ecclesiam dicti monasterii processionaliter ad
gratiarum actiones Deo reddendum coram magno altari ut moris
est introduximus ubi functo ympno factaque oratione consueta
confestim electio nostra clero et populo fuit publicata et modo
debito manifestata, Quare renerendi
tem tam deuote quam humiliter supplicando exoramus quatenus

imam vestram paternita-

electionem nostram tam canonice celebratam gratiose admittere
dignemini admis

saque anctoritate vestra ordinaria benigne con-
firmare ut Deo autore nobis et nostro monasterio sepedicto velut
pastrix ydonea preesse valeat utiliter et prodesse nosyue sub
ipsius salubri regimine et pronida gubernatione possimus crea-
tori nostro denote deseruire et salubriter militare. Ceterum ut
mia paternita
omnium et singulorum vota in premissis et singulis premissi:

vestra reuerend:

s cuidentius recognoscat nostrum
et
et esse unanimas

in hance electionem et petitionem nos fui

et concord

s hoe presens electionis nostre decretum paternitati
vestre humiliter transmisimus propriisque nostris nominibus
subscriptum et in euidentius premissorum robur in forma
publica per notarium publicum subscriptum redigi et subseribi
fecimus

igillique nostri communis jussimus et fecimus appen-
sione communiri et roborari apud dictum nostrum monasterium
die decimotertio mens

s Februarii_ anno Domini M v° trigesimo
septimo indictione undecima pontificatus domini Pauli pape
tertii anno quarto. Presentibus ibidem magistris Roberto Hop-
pringill rectore de Arnotstoun, Patricio Cokburne, rectore de
Petcekis, dominis Johanne Donaldson, Cuthberto Hynde, Andrea
Curry, capellanis, Willelmo Cokburne de Schoslie, Roberto
Watsoun de Yselye, Archibaldo Hoppringill, Adam Cokburne,
Jacobo Hoppringill, dompno Arthuro Craufurd suppriore monas-
terii de Newbottill, et dompno Jacobo Watsoun monacho einsdem
monasterii testibus requisitis hora decima ante imeridiem aut
cireiter,

Nomina monialium hee sunt dompna Isobella Ruthirfurd sup-



SUPPLEMENT TO PREFACE, 87

priorissa dompna Katrina Flemyng, Joneta Broun, Mariota
Ruthirfurd, Joneta Kingorne, Elizabeth Hoppringill, Katherina
Stevinstoun, Cristina Todrik, Katrina Fransche, Joneta Schaw,
Elena Riddall.

Nota quod nomina monialium inseri debent in principio pro-
cessus inter verba nato, ete., et vestre humiles, ete—rom. the
“Protocol Book of Edward Dickson, notary-publie, elerk to the
oficial of St Andrews, in the archdeaconry of Lothian.”  Pre-
served in the Advocates Library, 0%. 346) waco



INDEX.

PERDPEN, Thomas, Bishop of, 50,
William (Elphinstone), Bishop of,

) 1, Habirnyth),
Hugh de, 40, 48.
Abraham, Mx, 46,
adam, son of Meldred, 8.
son of Osbert, 4,
son of Philip, provost, 86.
Patrick son of, 11, 17, 47—sec
Aldin,
the clerk, 25, 32,
Addoe, female cousin of Cospatrick,
Earl of Dunbar, is, 6.
Adgar—see Elgar
‘Alan, son of Etherd, 5—see Edrede.
son of Thomas (the son of Elen of
Dereestyr), 20, 22, 23.
the marshal,’ 1
the seneschal, 30.
William, son’ of, 42.
AMbany, John, Duke of, Regent of Seot-
Tand, xx, Sxi, SRV.
Aldin (Haldane 2) Adaiu, son of, 6.
Patrick his sou, 6—sce Adam,

Gilbert, son of,

the chaplain, 46.
Aluwick, town of,
(Alnewych), V
constabul
Sir Wal
Amabilis, wife of
‘Andrew, the chap 2
the servant of Walter‘
militis,” 23, 24—sce Walter.
Anttlaslan, 7
Ardros, William of, chaplain, 10.
Argyll—see Ergile.
Arotstoun, Robert Hoppringill, rector
of, 36.
Amult, the dean, 48,

linus

Arouse, Mr Johu, Archdean of Glas-
gow, and sceretary to James IL,
50,

Assinden—see Hastynden.

Athole (Adholia, Asccles), county of,

73,
forest of, xiv.
James, Earl of, 49.

Patrick, son of the Earl of, 14.
yn), Amnald, 36, 38.
Anirew, Lord, 50.

Baye, Robert, 6.
Rakestaneden—see Bassendean.
Balliol, Alexander de, of Cavers, 40.
Banbureh(e), town and hospital of, 38,

William Biscop, chaplain of, 38.
Bartholomew, t] aplam, 8,

st of Edinburgh, 37.
William his son, 37.
son of Wido, the glassmaker of
Alnwic

Bassendean (Bakestancden, Bakestanes-
den, Bassinden, “Bastyndane,
Bastynden), xviii, i, 32-34,
41.

Hutred, chaplain of, 38.
Roger, son of William of, xviii, 34
see Mahle.
Alicia, his wife, 34.
Bell, Mr William, 44,
Belle, William, 33.
Bellingdene, 48.

‘Benans, John of, 37.

Robert of, his brother, 3
-y, Hugh de, justiciar of Lothian,
40,

Berl

Bernham (Berham, Bernam), Margaret,

Sir Robert of, mayor of Bi
Robert of, rector of ‘T'
xviii, 36,
Thomas of, 3:
Sir Thomas
William of, 37.

wick, 38.
ningane,

the provost, 36.



INDEX,

Berwick (Bereunic, Berewye, Berewyk
Beruik, Berawye, Berawyk, Be
Wyk), shire of, 50, 51, 54, 53, 58. |
town of, xv, 10, 34-36,
Arthur's land in, 3
Corsyate (Crosyate) in, 35, 36.
|
|

John Gray’s land in, 36.
Vadinggate in, 35, 36.
, the | ‘boatman, burgess of, xviii,
34,
Betoun, James, Archbishop of St An-
drews,
Birgham (Birghame, Byrgham), viii, ix, |
6, 8.
Astin (Hasting) of, 5, 8. |
Biscop, William, chaplain of Banbureh,
3

ae Wi iam, 40.

Blakbor, Patrick, priest, 44.
Bloet, R., 6.
Boilell, Hadulf de, 46
Boithvile, Patrick, Earl of (1490), 54.
Boltevy, William of, 20.
Ranulph of, $9.
Bradforde, Alexander of, 88.
Bradspotes, im
Brankestun, Sir Adan of, chaplain, 42.
Brechin, George Schoriswode, Bishop
of, 49.

Broun, Jonet, nun of Coldstream,
84, 87.
Brommore, 81
Brun, Sir Maurice, 15.
Buluer, Sir John, xxvi,
William, xxiv,
Burehe, Sir David of, 14.
Byrgham—sce Bingham.

Cakewellegat, xvi, 23, 24.
Caleoy—see Kelso.
Caldestreflat (Kaldestreflat), 17
Cambron, Sir Robert, Sheriif of Athole,
78, 79. |
Camminesmeda,in Thornidich, xviii,30.
Candida Casa, Ninian, Bishop of, 49.
Chawupunas, John, 38.
nelme, Alexander of, 49.
Chirnsyde (Seyrneside), Sir Patrick (of
the Moestun), rector of, 2, 3, 7.
Cistereium (Citeaux), i.
Cunte, Symon, 37.
Coceflatte, xvi, 24
Cokburne (Kokeburn), Adam, 86.
Ninian, 56.
Patrick, rector of Petvckis, $6.
Sir Robert of, 7.
William, of Chouslie (Schoslie), 56,
86.

89

Coldstream (Caldstrem, Caldestrem,
Kaldestrem), convent of, passim,
Adam, Adam, Alan, Alan, aud
Robert, brothers of Coldstream,

77,79.
ir Adam, chaplai
Ale nile of

‘iot, Priore: of, xvii, xxviii, 5
John, chaplain of, 22, 49.
Robert of, clerk, 18.
Sir Roger, chaplain of,
Walter, chaplain of, 2 .
Walter, master of house
77.

m, master of, 17,
William Drax, Prior of,

Sir Wilh
Coldyngham
xvii, 43.
Colquhone, Sir John de, of that Pe 50,

Copland (Coupland) Thomas of, 8 17,
Corbet, Roger, monk of Kelso, 5.
Courtenay, Willian dey xi

Ada of Daw 5 wife,
Craufurd (Craufarde) , David, Earl of,
50.
Sir Arthur, sub-prior of Newbuttle,
36,
Cressiughian, Sir Hugh de, xiii, xiv, 78-

$l.
Crumbesyde, burn of, 2
Cumyn (Cumyne), Jolin,
ry, wife of Patrick
Lof Dunbar, xv.
Andrew, chaplain, 86.

21,

avo,

Davre, Lord,
David £., King of Se otland,
the tailor of Raumisden on the

ii.

Ness, 10,
Derchester (Dercestria, Ds
chestyr), xvi, 15, 21-23.

Alan, son of Thomas, son of Elen

of xvi, 20, 2

Sir Patrick, Son of Walter of, 16.
Thomas of, 10.
‘Thomas, son of Walter of, xvi, 1¢
Walter, sou of Sir Thomas of, xvi,

styr, Der-
23,

son of Walter of, xvi, 15.

alter, called the chaplain, son of
Walter, son of Sir Thomas of, 12.
Walter of, 7, 15, 22, 23, 31, 42, 49.




90

Derchester, Richard, son of Hugh the |
Alan Vyte of, 10,
Dickson, Edward, elerk to offi
nul notary,
Donaldsoun, Sir John, ¢
r Thomas, priest,

Larquis of, xx!
Drier of Coldi

Drummond, John Lord, justiciar
5A,
Doe Hugh of, 18.

Karktom of, 16,
Addoe, consin of Cospatrick,
of, 6.
Sir Alexander, son of Patrick (111),
rl of, 2, 10, 12.
Cospatrick (Gospatric), Earl of, vii,
, xvi, 6 8, 11, 12, 18,

|
Earl

Dunder, his countess, ix, 6, 8, 15,
46.
Fergus, son of Patrick (L.),
3.
(Six) Juhu, son of Patrick (IH.),
Earl of, 2, 10, 12. |
1 of, Iurgess of Berwick, xviii, |

Lot,

21 of, som, of Karl
Waldeve, , 5, 25, 26, 4
Ada, his "I danghter
Willian the Lion, si,
is danghiter, x, xi—see Cour-

k (1), F

of

ne

3 7, 49.
1, or Euphemia, his coun-

a
{
ond isite |
Chet sterol Robust Bic,
his first wife, xv.
Patrick (V.), Earl of, son of F

vi

Cunyn, his wife,
H (Ve al of se of Karl |
Patrick (1V.), xv, Ld. \

Patrick, 9, 34.
Patrick, ‘atrick, Earl of,
24,

son of I

ignated brother of Earl
deve and uncle of Patrick |

INDEX.

esignated
sill” and “of Green-
tor of the Earls of
18, 47.

Peter of, 38,
Sir Robert, son of Patrick (II.)

Earl of, 42
alileve,

Alin ( Aclina), his countess, x, 4.
Walter (Waldeve!), son of Cos-

pa
(Sir) William, sou of’ Earl Patrick
(1.), and brother of Patrick (11.)
Earl of, xi, 11-13, 20, 21, 27, 28,
42, 49,
William (of Home), son of Patrick
the brother of Waldeve Earl of
x, xi, 6, 13, 47.
Ada, his consin and spouse, x, xi.
Dunbretou, xxv.
Duncow, Sir William, priest, 2.
Dunkeld, H. Archdeacon of,
Duns, Mx Hemy of the Monchtun,
rector of, io.
Hugh, forester of, 21,
Patrick, parson of, 11, 47.
Durham, cathedral of, xx
St Gathbert's Chu

h, i
John, prior of Cathedral Church of,
xvii.
Robert of, 38.
| Date, Oshert, 35,
Dvi, 19.

rd, the Tenton, 89.
i i Henry of, 6, 11, 47.

ger, Edger, Eger),
third son of Cospatrick (II1.),
Earl of Dunbar, sii
Alan, son of, 13.
ick, son of, 8, 4, 18.
k, son of Patrick son of, 3.
Sir Patrick (Patrick, sou of Walter),
xii, 1, 3, 8, 9 14.
Lady Mari e, widow of Sir
Patrick, xii, xiii, 9.
Walter, son of, 8, 4, 47
Euinburgh, six, xxvii, xxix, 50, 54
BS, 8
‘Trinity College Church in, 56.
Edmerisdun (Edmerisden), Alan of, 23.
Falrede, Alan of, 32—see Alan,
lulf (Edolt), son of Geoitrey,
Norman, son of, ix, 6, 18.
Norman, heir of Norman, son of, 6
—see Lay
Auabilis, his

oT,




INDEX. 91

Edward I. of England, ix, »i
xxxii, 80.
Prince,’ afterwards King Edward
IL, of England, ix.
gland, x

-xv, Gordon, ‘Thomas of, xii, 5, 18, 20, 21,

on of Sir Thomas of, xii,

1 of Dunbar (111.)—see

ens, son of Thomas, 15.
ander, of Butterdene, xxix, BY,
54, 56. Patrick of, 23,

Ninian, 56. adonforde, xxvi
see Hellum. Grahame, Patrick, Lord le, 49.
English (Angliens), William, 87. Grame, David de, 14.
Ergile, Colin, Earl of, chancellor of | Gray, Audrew, Lord
James 1V., 50, 54. SitTohi senesehal of Baal ‘trick,

") manor of, x.
rick of ser Dba,

Faulauche ( Fahelaue), 82, 34.

Grenelan (Grenlan), (Sit) Matthew de,
mayor of Berwick, 35, 36.
Grim, Sir'Thou
21 Gurlay (Gurley), Sir Hu sh of, seneschal
atherine, nun of Coldstream, | of the Earl of Dunbar, 2, 30, 31.
84, 87. Rodloul of, 4.
Fline, Symon, 35. Guthre, Mr id, of that ilk, clerk of
Flodden, battle of, the rolls and register to Janies
Fogo (Fogo ), John, dean of, 11, 325) IL, 50.
33,
Fortincten, Tien y 5. Habirnyth—see Abernct!
Foulartoun, Dona ald, ‘56, Hallane, the steward, 6.
he), Katrine, nun of | Haldehaistoe, Sir
84, 87. Haldhersill aldhirsehyll, — Vetus
‘okyt, 10. Herissil, ie, Old Hirsel), xii,
Fersor, Fresell, xvi, 11, 1
Berni aed, 3, 6, 17, 20, Halsigton, Sir Alan, son of Gilbert of, 2.

William of, 2
Fenwycke, Rautle,
Ferniley (
Flemyng,

re Aldin (?)
ohn, parson of, 7.

Coldstream,
Franke, William, ' ol

1. Haltun (Halyhtun, Haultun, Haylttn,
Gilbert, ix, 4, 6. | Haueltun, "Hutton ?), — Radulf
Thomas, 8, 13, 47. (Randulf, Ranulf) of, xv, 5, 8,

,
William of, brother of Radulf,

Gamel, Six, the chaplain, 3. 2.
Vtred, son of, 4, Matilda, daughter of Radulf of,
Geollrey, son of Gerard, 33. | Halyburton (Haliburtun, Halybustins,

chaplain, & Philip of, 3,
Sir, rector of Lintun, 16. Walter of,
Ibert, Thomas, son of, 13. Hanilton, Sir John, of Trabroun, xx

son of Walter, 4. Harelaw, 33.

parson of Witingham, Harkarres (Harkars), Sir Alan of, 28,
Glammys, John, Lord, justiciar (1490), 43

54. Hassekitke, Henry of, 48.

Glasgow (Glasko), town of, xxv. Hastin, Mr Adam, provost, 3.

John Aronse, Archdeteon of, 50. | Hastynden, Willian, viear of, 17.

J., Bishop of, 48. Haucheiston, 42.

Richard Murehede, dean of, 54. | Haukyrstun, Maleoln of, 10,

Robert, Bishop of, 53. Haultnu—see Haltun,

Archibald Quhitelaw, sublean of, Hauyn, Aruald, 38—see Anyn.
5 Hellum (Iellim), (Sir) Robert of, 37—
see Elem.
Heury 11., King of England, viii.
VIIL, King of England, xx,

5
Gordon Gordan), »
Adam of, 3, 25, 29
‘Adam, son of Adam of,
Peter of, 12




92 INDEX.

Henry, son of Cunan, 19. Hume, Alexander, of that ilk, great
(Sir), chaplain of Coldstream, 22. chamberlain, 54.
the chaplain, 14, Mariota, lady’ of, second wife of
the clerk, “nepos” of Abbot of | William de Hine, and widow of
Stirling, 19. Sir Patrick Edgar, xii, xiii, 9.
Roger, son of, 19, 20. Roger of, 16.
t, Mr, 46, | William’ot,

Ile, ete. —see Hirsel Humphrey (Cmiridus), the chaplain, 13.
lesauder, in Dernehester, | Hunpul,

xxix, | Hupsetlintun, Robert of 19, 20,
Id, 1k, son of, 6. Hatred, son of Berolf, 33.

. chaplain of Bastynden, 33,
Hutton—see Halton.

| Huyishenigh, xvi, 15.
| Hynde, sir Cuthbut, chaplain, $6,

Heseliclov, 19.
Heselihow, Imrn of 19.
Hetley, Robert of,
Hettun (Hein), Y
Henedes,

illiam of,

sille, Herishille, Herisilles, |
issille, Hersil, 1
, Hersille, Herssil, Hi
Hitsell, Hirsill), ix, 3, 3
sxvili, xxix, xvxii, 6, 8
1s, 4, 46, 47, 54-57
Ad: son of,
47. Sir, alunoner of Kelso, 5.
“uepos” of bishop Robert, 45,
ander of, chaplain, 19, 20, the she

ret, his queen, x
«of Svots, Xx,

plain of, 15,

Walter, “tirmarius ” of the Earl i r, son of Wa
of, Sir, treasurer of

William, son of Patrick of 24—see Jordan, son-in-law of William de! Salle,
Dunbar, 37.

Hirsel, Old

Hoe, fohn of,
Stephen vf,

Hoga, Symon of, 4

Haldhersill,

Kallestreflat, xii, 17.
| Kelso Caleoy, Kalkon, Kellkw), Abbey

Sir John, almoner of, 5.
Ii, Abbot off 34,
R., Prior of, 5.

George, son of Sir David, xx. Richard, Abbot of, 29.
rick of, ?2. Rohert, Abbot of, 49.
Hume ind Danbar (William). Sir Richard, almoner of, 5.

gil (Vringle), Archibald, 88, Kingorn (Kingorne, Kyngornie\, Adam,
vet, mn of Coldstream, xxx. person of, 8 47.

Prioress of Coldstream,
NIN-XNS, 55, 52, 83,
dames, 86.
Janet, Pri
Mar
Robert, rector of Aruotstoun, $6,
Hormestun’ (Hormestur), Sir Alin of,
21

of Coldstream,
et, Prioress of Coldstre

Laerei, Roger of, 17
Lambekin, the sten
Lamell—see Laynal,
Laurence, Mr John, notary,

Ma, the otlivial, 11,

Hugh, forester of Danse

Walter

, sun ot, !




INDEX.

Law, Sir Andrew, priest, 5:
Laynal (Lainhail, Tacit, Lanele,
Lanell, Len.

Laynal, Leinball,
iD, vii, x, xi, xy,
5, 7-10, 15, 40,

Henry, priest of, vii,
Norman of, 4, 6 sce Edulf.
Amabilis, spouse of Norman of, 3,

4, 5.
Richard of, son, of Norman anil
alnabilis, x, xi, 4, 5, 8

‘Thomas of 45
ter, chaplain of, 15.
¥ iain of, 15.

see Liddale.
Layng, John, rector of Newlandis, 50.
Lees, estate of, near Coldstream, xix,

Lect, stream of, i.
Leinhall—see Laynal.
Len, Mr Alan ol, Archdeacon of Nor-
thumberland, 39.
Lene, meadow of,
Lemel—see Laynal.
Let, 13, 14.
Letham (Letam, Letame, Lethame,
Lettam), “Alexander, parson of,
5,11, 47,
(Sir) John of, 2, 7, 20, 21, 24-26,
29, 42.
Mr ‘John, subdean_ of | Trinity
College Chureh, Edinburgh, 56,
Ketel Chetel, Ketell, Ketill) of,
AT?)
Robert of, 27, 2
Levingstoun, Jame

Lord, high cham-

Lienhale—sce Laynal.

Lilliseline, John of, 18.

Lindsay, Lord, 50.

Lintun, Geollrey, veetor of, 16,

Radulph, 49.

Colin, Lord, 50, 54.

Lothian, Andrew, Archdeacon of, 46.
Archibald of Quhitlaw, ” Arch-

deacon of, 50,

John, Archdeacon of, 47.

Lukre, Symon of, 38.

Magdalen, que
Magnus, Dr, xxviii,
Mahle (Mahile, Mille, Male, Mayl,

ames V., xxviii.

Malus, Melville), Revert _ of,
“nepos” of William of Mable,
xviii,

93

Mable, Robert of, “nepos* of Garin of

ssendean.

le, xvii, 17, 18,
| Marealdy, Ale: ;
March, earldom of, see Me
, Princess, of Scotland, ix,
James [V.—see James,
| Marshal, John the, 19, 20.
| Matilda) mother of Walter the ehap-
hin, 24
Maunsel,

ches.

‘mon, 86.
hivplain, 18.
1

Meldzed, Adam, son of,

Melrose, Abbey of, xi,

| bot crt
Melville-

Merley ‘ans

13,

Ranulf of, x.

Auliaua, daughter of Gospatrick 1.
of Dunhar, his spouse, x.

Robert of, 47.

Roger of, x, 8, 11, 18, 17, 20, 21,

ale.
Mary, Mee), R, of,

| Mersehes

(March, Merch, Merchia,
Merse), earldom of the, 50, 51,
57, 58.
Dean of, 34.
Millyans, Sir John de, 15,
| Mocstun (Moetun), Sir Patrick of the,
' vector of Chirnsyde, 2, 3.

Molesine, Robert, Abbot of, i.

| Monchtun, Mr Hemy of the, rector of
Dunse, 10,

| Monte Alto, Bernard de, 40.

| Mop, Sir Stephen, rector of, 40,

Moray, John, Bishop of, 49.

of Tulibardyn, William de, 50,

Morell, Robert, 3, 5, 8.

| Mulynaus, Radulf de, 49.

Murehede, Richard, ‘Dean of Glasgow
and Keeper of the Rolls (1480),
54

Museum, Robert of, 34.

Muskilburg, Mr John of,
Teviotdale, 18.

official of

Namus (Le Neymm), Richard, 19, 20.
Nesbit, Sir Robert of, 16, 30, 31
Newbottle, Sir Arthur Cranfind, sub-

privr of, 8
Sir James Watsoun, monk of, 86.
New Minster, Abbey of, near Morpeth,

Sir Adam, Abbot of 40.
Norham, castle of, xxvi, xxvii.




o4 INDEX.

Norman —see Laynal. Radulf, Mr, Archdeacon of St Andrews,
Norreis, Robert le, 8 :
Northumberland, Mr Alan of Leu, Areh- the chaplain, 4.

deacon of, the prior, 18,

auchburne (Rawehburn), Thomas of,
son of William of Rawehburne,
xviii, 30, 31,

Redpeth, Edward of, 17.

Oliphant, Laurence, Lord | Regi 2
Oliver (Sit), Jolin, 35, Richard, son of Hugh the cook of Der-

Onn, brother of Hutred the chaplain of | cester,

Bastynden, | the chaplain, 5.
Ormistun, Alan of, 2, 12, 14. Abbot of Kelso, 29,
Osbert, Adam, son of 4. Riddell (Ridale), Ellen, nun of Cold-
Ostaynton, P., of, 84. stream, xxx, $4, 87.
Otyrburn, 19, Robert of, 36,

Rodarford, James, xxvi.
(Papily), Stephen, the steward, | Roger, Sit, chaplain of Coldstream, 22.

Papedy
son of Henry, 19, 20,

Thomas, 7, 12. sou of Martin, the weaver, of Ber-
Sir —, the seneschal, 14, 3

Patrick, the deacon, 13. som of Rana ald, 38.
Sir, parson of Chirnsyd, 7. |. Walter, son of, 14.

parson of Dunse, 11 Roland, the steward, 8.
son of Adam, 17, 47. Rondes, xi, 13.
son of Richard, 17. Rowle, Sir Gilbert of, 12.
ir, son of Walter Roxbursd burgh, Rokisbureh),
William, son of, 6, 48,
Perth, xix, 50, un of, 11, 47,
Peteekis, Patrick Cokburne, rector of, Ruthirfurd (Rodarford), Isabella,
86. prioress of Coldstream,
Peter, the chaplain, 14, 37. 86.
(Peris) the clerk, 7 James, xxvi.
Philip, the el Mariot, nun of Coldstream,
Adam, son of, 36 $4, 87.
Pinkerton, Robert of, 2
Plesset (Plasset, Pl | St Andrews, Mr Radulf, Archdeacon of,
Adami of, 40, | 11, 47.
John of, xvii 6 James Betoun, Archbishop of,
lon, his wife, 2 | SNK.
Johanna, his a nun of James, Bishop of, 49.

sub-
84,

Coldstream, Richanl, Bishop of, ix, x, 46.
Pollevreh—see Polwort. John, Prior of, keeper of the privy
Polwarth (Polwort, Pollevreh, Pow- seal of James 1V.,

wn), Adam of, 20, 21, St John, William, Lord,’ master of the

Sir Robert and treasurer to James
Pringle, family * of,
pring,

rdohn de, 49.
Putanys! 30,

William de,
Jordan, his son
Quhitelaw, Archibald, subdes - Sautemareis, Patri
ow, and secretary to James IV, Beaithemo

Quhitlaw, Archibald of, Archdeacon of | Seha uw, Jonet, nun at Coldstream, XXX,

Lothian, and secretary to James. 34, 87.
Hil, 50. Schoriswole, George, Bishop of Brechin,
Qwiteestyr (Qwitchestyr), 18, 19—see 49

Witcester. Schottun (Schotton), Richard of, the
clerk, 40.
Sir Thomas, chaplain of, 40,

R,, the archdeacon's chaplain, 46.



INDEX.

Seyrnesidle—see Chirnsyde.

Sellnikleche (Selbukleche), xi, 20, 21.

Sellar, ‘Thomas of, 36.

Sengedewde (Sengidewed), xi, 20, 22.

Sepley, mill of

Simpritm (Simprin,
Sympryn)

un, Sympring,

Sintun, Sir Andvew of, 49—see Swin-
ton.
Skaitmure
Soltre, Mr Wart
Mr Will
Spechene:
Spitelitat, 22.
Stally (Staueley), Thomas, 15.
Walter of, 49.
Staintun, Sir Walter, rector of, 40.
Stamforde, Sir Johu, Viscount of,
Staneley—see Stall
Stephen, Sir, rector of Mop, 40.
Stevinstoun, Katrine, mun of Coldstream,
xx, 84, 87.
Stichel, G., Dean of, 46.
Stirling (Sterlyn, Steiuelin,

trincling, |

rivellin), xxv, xxix, 58,
castle of, xx.
holas, Albbot of, 18.
Henry, nephew of Nicholas, AVbot |
of, 19,
William, canon of, 4. |

Strikesley, xi, 20, 21.
Strong (Zortis), Mr John, 39.
Strothertlat,
Surrey, John de
‘guardian of
ark of (1512
Swinton (sintun,
Syntun
Little,
Alexander of, :
Sir Andrew of, 49. \
Enmulf of, xvii, 8.
John of, lord of that ilk, x
43, 74,
Mr Nicolas of, 18.
Symon, the monk,
Sir John, son of, 14.
Sympring, Sympryn—see Simprim.
Syntun—see Swinton,
nd, 40,

Warenne, Earl of,
cotland, xiv, SI.

, xxtii-x xvi

ion, Swynton, |

‘Tempill, James, 52.
Tevidale(Theuidale), Mr John of Mus
Duryh, official of, 18.
the Archdeacon of, £8.
Thomas, Sir, chaplain of Schotton, 40.
son of Gilbert, 13.
William, son of, 15,

| Tossanir,

95

Thornidich (Thornidyk, 'Thornyik),
xii,
Touvig( Thoth ig, Totheryg),

xii, xvii, xxviii, 17, 48.
Gilbert of, 1¢
Todrik, € ‘stina,
XXX, S4,

ola of
Tumnoc (Tunoc), Adam, of Kelso,

min of Collstream,

Vache, Sir Alexander la 49.
Unnfridns, the chaplain,

Valtun, Nes of, 17sec Waltun.

—see Wallibus.

Vepund (Vepunt, Veteriponte), Willian
de,

nde, the younger, 28.

Vernenil, xvii, 74,

Vired, son of Gammell, 4

Vuccester, William, 38.

Vuuringtin, Roger of, 40—see Wrdrin-
tun,

Vyte, Alan, of Der

ster, 10,

| Waldevey (Sir) Fol, sou of, 14, 21.

Lobe
Walter, 51

“filins waits
Andrew.

2 — see

companion of Edward 1.’s treasurer,
77.

Thomas, son of Walter “filins
militis,” 2

“firmarius” of the

chaplain of Laynal,

chaplain of Morton, aud anaster of
Coldstream, xxxii,

son of Hugh, 33.

1 of Roger, 14.

Sir Patrick, son of, 7, 24, 30, 42.

Sir, vector of Staintun, 40.

son of Swarily, 24.

earl, 16,

the chaplain, otherwise desiguated
son of Walter, the son of Swardy,

3, 24, 30.
Matilda, bis moth
son of Walter, 4
Waltun (Valtun), N
Wark, castle of, xxv.
Warndham, Thomas of, xviii,
Watlandis, 33.
Watsoun, SirJames, monk of Newbottle,
86.
Robert, of Yselye, 86,

» 24.

of, 17, 19, 20.




96

Watsoun, William, author of ‘Historie
Memorials of Coldstream Abbey,”

Weddirhede, Robert,
Thomas, 3
Werk, Sir Geo
Westminster,
Whitchester (Qwitcestyr, Quitchestyr,
Witeestyr, Witchestyr, — Wite-
chestre), x, xv, xxxiii, 18, 19, 41.

Whithorn (Candida Casa}, ‘Ninian,
Bishop of, 49.

Wido, glassmaker in Almwiek, 88, 89,
Mariot, his wife, 39.
Bartholomew, his son, 39.

Ysouda, his daughter, xviii, 38

William, King, the Lion, viii.

Sir, 5.

the chaplain, 84.

the ews chaplain, 15.

(Sir), viewr of Assinden and master
of Caldstrem, 10, 17,

ey of, chaplain, 42.
iv, 81,

INDEX.

William, goldsmith of Berwick, 36.
canon of Stirling, 4.
son of Alan, 4
son of Pate
bar.

, 6, 13—see Dun-

Witehou, uuns of, viii, 6, 8.
Wlyeshope, 20.
Wolsey, Cardinal,

Wudrintun (Vudringtun), Sir Gerard of,
40.
Joln of, 40.
Roger of, 40.

York, Roger of, 36.
Young, Alexander, notary, 56.
Ysouda, danghter of Wido the glass-

MFarlane & Erskine, Printers, Edinburgh



















